675, Berecingum Convent, near London, England
Circling light
A large light came down over praying nuns At Berecingum (Barking) convent, circled
their location, and flew up. The description suggests that the light came from a welldefined object:
"For one night, after matins had been sung, and those handmaids of Christ had gone
out of their chapel to the tombs of the brothers who had departed this life before them, and
were singing the customary songs of praise to the Lord, on a sudden a light from heaven,

like a great sheet; came down upon them all, and struck them with such amazement, that,

in consternation, they even left off singing their hymn.
"But that resplendent light, in comparison wherewith the sun at noon-day might seem
dark, soon after, rising from that place, removed to the south side of the monastery, that is,
to the westward of the chapel, and having continued there some time, and rested upon
those parts, in the sight of them all withdrew itself again to heaven, leaving no doubt in
the minds of all, but that the same light, which was to lead or to receive the souls of those
handmaids of Christ into Heaven, also showed the place in which their bodies were to rest
and await the day of the resurrection." We note that, although the "great sheet" of light
could have been caused by a meteor, the later behavior of the phenomenon (rising and
circling) seems to exclude this explanation.
55

Source: J. A. Giles, D.C.L., ed. The Venerable Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England,
Book IV, ch. VII (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1867).

At dusk, seven stars are said to have "drifted together" to the north-east, after which they
sank below the horizon. The information is too sketchy to reach any conclusion regarding
the nature of the unusual "drifting stars."

Source: W. Raymond Drake, Gods and Spacemen in the Ancient East (New York: Signet,
1968), 106. The original source has not emerged.

Circa May 698, Ireland, location unknown
Three flying shields
A passage extracted from a 17th century transcription of an older but undated manuscript
offers another example of the use of the term 'shield' in connection with a phenomenon in
the sky. As noted by researcher Yannis Deliyannis, "it is interesting and unusual in
medieval records. It is reminiscent of course of the 'clipei' of the authors of the Roman
period."
The text reads: "Three shields were seen in the heavens, as it were warring from the
east to the west, after the manner of undulating waves on a very calm night, being that of
the Ascension of the Lord. The first was snowy, the second fiery, the third bloody; which
prefigured, as is thought, three succeeding evils: for in the same year the herds of cows

throughout Ireland were nearly destroyed, and not only in Ireland, but also throughout the
whole of Europe."
ANNALS OF IRELAND.
THREE FRAGMENTS
mm >MN anm «NNI
Kr DUBHALTACH MAC I1KBISICH/

»•»« * WTImIwniAi wTwBAX&LMAITHU\XH*U KiiOiuTmcfS..» ••• «in
mux ihowak an. JLtux.
r»<mi(« i*rainr uairtin, «rm « mi NII •*•»..*•
ra%

DOBI
.IN:t ym.
«n.
i
>
e
.
1
awwni
FOB 7HE 1R1FH AWH^EOLOOIf At. AID CELTIC NX'IEXY
i860.

Fig. 6: Annals of Ireland
Source: Annals of Ireland, three fragments copied from ancient sources by Dubhaltach

Mac Firbisigh, trans. John O'Donovan (Dublin: Irish Archaeological and Celtic Society,
1860). The date would have been 40 days following that year's celebration of Easter.

June 741, Constantinople (Istanbul), Turkey
Hovering crescents and fire
In the reign of Constantine, Copronymus, son of Leo, Emperor of Byzantium, three

columns of fire and flame appeared in the sky during the month of June. The same

phenomenon was also seen in the month of September: "There appeared a thing, also in
735 AD, like a half-moon, in the northern quadrant of the sky, and little by little, over a
rather long time, it passed to the southern quarter, and then returned to the north, and
finally descended under the Earth." (i.e., presumably dropped down below the horizon).

Source: Jean-Baptiste Chabot, Chronique de Michel le Syrien, patriarcheJacobite
d'Antioche 1166-1199 (Paris, 1899-1910).
52.

749, Ulster, Ireland
Aerial ships, seen along with their crews

The 15th century Annals of Ulster, which cover the period AD 431 to AD 1540, state that
"Ships, with their crews, were seen in the air above Cluain Moccu."
Source: The Annals of Ulster (Corpus of Electronic Texts Edition
www.ucc.ie/celt/published/T100001A/index.html)

Circa 760, France: Abductions and aerial ships CD
During the reign of Pepin le Bref (715-768) many extraordinary phenomena are said
to have appeared in the French skies. The air was filled with human figures, ships with
sails and battling armies. Several individuals stated they had been abducted by aerial
beings.
A contemporary source has never been found and there is a strong suspicion that it
originated with the Comte De Gabalis (1670), by Abbe N. de Montfaucon de Villars.
Source: Jules Garinet, Histoire de la Magie en France (Paris, 1818).

776, Syburg Castle, Germany
Two flying objects stop a war
In 776 the Saxons rebelled against Charlemagne and attacked the castle of Syburg with
continued lack of success, finally deciding to storm the castle. They reportedly "saw the

likeness of two shields red with flame wheeling over the church. When the heathens
outside saw this miracle, they were at once thrown into confusion and started fleeing to

their camp in terror. Since all of them were panic-stricken, one man stampeded the next
and was killed in return, because those who looked back out of fear impaled themselves
on the lances carried on the shoulders of those who fled before them. Some dealt each
other aimless blows and thus suffered divine retribution."

57

Source: Carolingian Chronicles: Royal Frankish Annals and Nithard's Histories, trans.
Bernhard Walter Scholz (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1970), 53, 55.

811, Near Aachen on Via Aquisgrana, Germany
Great flaming globe
Emperor Charlemagne sees a great flaming globe descending from east to west and is
thrown from his horse. Although the horse may have been frightened by an especially
bright meteor, the situation suggests either that the object was close to the emperor's
party, or that the meteor was very spectacular indeed: "One day in his last campaign into
Saxony against Godfred, King of the Danes, Charles himself saw a ball of fire fall
suddenly from the heavens with a great light, just as he was leaving camp before sunrise
to set out on the march. It rushed across the clear sky from right to left, and everybody
was wondering what was the meaning of the sign, when the horse which he was riding
gave a sudden plunge, head foremost, and fell, and threw him to the ground so heavily that
his cloak buckle was broken and his sword belt shattered; and after his servants had
hastened to him and relieved him of his arms, he could not rise without their assistance.
He happened to have a javelin in his hand when he was thrown, and this was struck from
his grasp with such force that it was found lying at a distance of twenty feet or more from
the spot."
Source: Einhard: The Life of Charlemagne, trans. Samuel Epes Turner (New York:
Harper & Brothers, 1880).

813, Santiago de Compostela, Spain
Mysterious star CD

56.

One night, a hermit named Pelayo heard music in a wood and saw a peculiar shining star
above Mount Libredon, a former Celtic sacred site. Because of this sighting the place was
called, in Latin, "Campus Stellae," field of the star, a name that was later turned into

Compostela.

A modern brochure adds: "Bishop Teodomiro, who received notice of that event,
instituted an investigation, and so the tomb of the Apostle was discovered. King Alphonse
II declared Saint James the patron of his empire and had built a chapel at that place (...)
More and more pilgrims followed the way of Santiago, the 'Path of Saint James,' and the
original chapel soon became the cathedral of the new settlement, Santiago de
Compostela."
58

Source: Santiago, History and Legends

(http://www.red2QQQ.com/spain/santiago/history.html).
To the best of our knowledge, the story first appeared in the Concordia de Antealtares, a
text dated from 1077.

814, China, exact location unknown
Stars emerge from an object
A luminous object rises, lights up the ground. Many small "stars" emerge from it.

Source: Biot, Catalogue des etoiles filantes en Chine (1846), op. cit.

Circa 815, Lyons, France
Saint Agobard and the abductees from Magonia
Saint Agobard was born about 769 in Languedoc, came to Lyons at age 20, was ordained
in 804 and succeeded Archbishop Leidrade when the latter retired in 814.
Archbishop Agobard was an enlightened, intelligent man who took an active role in
the political debates of his time: he became involved on Lothaire's side in his fight against
his father and even wrote a book supporting him. This cost him his position when Louis
the Pious came to power, but he was reinstated two years later, in 837. He died in 840.
A serious philosopher and early-day "rationalist," Agobard left no less than 22 books,
including several treatises against superstitions and heretical beliefs, along with political
pamphlets and volumes of poetry. The anonymous French translator of his work (actually
Antoine Pericaud, Sr.) entitled De Grandine et Tonitruis or "About Hail and Thunder"
notes in his introduction:
"All of his writings, whose style is consistently correct and often elegant, deserve the
honor of being translated, for they make known to us the mores and customs of the first
half of the ninth century, better than those of any other writer of the time. In particular one
must acknowledge that he fought the prejudices and superstitions of his time more
strongly and with a higher sense of reason than anyone else. It is against one of these
prejudices that he compiled "About Hail and Thunder".

The book was first partially translated from the Latin as a piece published in
L 'Annuaire de Lyon for 1837. The translation was then revised and reprinted as an essay,
with very limited distribution, in 1841 (Lyon: Imprimerie de Dumoulin, Ronet et Sibuet,
Quai St. Antoine). It is this volume we have studied in the Lyons municipal library.
The main purpose of De Grandine et Tonitruis is to debunk popular misconceptions
about the weather. In particular, the Archbishop of Lyons fought against the idea that
winds and storms were due to the influence of sorcerers (appropriately named
"tempestari" by the vulgar people): his main argument is that "Whoever takes away from
God His admirable and terrible works, and attributes them to Man, is a false witness
against God Himself." It is in this context that he raises his voice against those who are
insane enough to believe that there could be ships ("naves") flying through the clouds:

59

"Plerosque autem vidimus et audivimus tanta dementia obrutos, tanta stultitia alienates,
ut credant et dicant: quandam esse regionem, quae dicatur MAGONIA, ex qua naves
veniant in nubibus..." which our translator renders as follows:

" We have seen and heard many people crazy enough and insane enough to believe
and to state that there exists a certain region called MAGONIA, out of which ships come
out and sail upon the clouds; these ships (are said to) transport to that same region the
products of the earth that have fallen because of the hail and have been destroyed by the
storm, after the value of the wheat and other products of the earth has been paid to the
'Tempestaires' by the aerial navigators who have received them"

Saint Agobard continues: "We have even seen several of these crazy individuals who,

believing in the reality of such absurd things, exhibited before an assembled crowd four
people in chains, three men and one woman, said to have [fallen] down from one of these
ships. They had been holding them bound for a few days when they brought them before
me, followed by the multitude, in order to lapidate them. After a long argument, truth
having prevailed at last, those who had shown them to the people found themselves, as a
prophet says, in the same state of confusion as a robber who has been caught." (Jerem.
2:26)

What distinguishes this episode from many folklore tales of ships sailing in the sky is
the availability of a precise reference, the authority of a known and respected historical
figure who has written extensively on many other subjects, and the fact that the
Archbishop, while he testified to the authenticity of a first-hand report, remained a skeptft
about the reality of the objects themselves.
Since we do not have access to the statements made on the other side of the argument,
we will never know what the "cloudships" looked like, or why the witnesses thought that
the three men and one woman had in fact come from these ships and should be stoned to
death. Naturally the mere fact of alighting from a "cloudship" may have been proof of
sorcery. In one of his books French physicist Arago states that until the time of
Charlemagne it was a common custom to erect long poles in the fields to protect them
from the hail and the thunderstorms. These poles were not lightning rods, as one might
suppose, but magical devices which were only effective when they held aloft certain
parchments. In his Capitularies, published in 789, Emperor Charlemagne forbade this
"superstitious" practice. His statement teaches us that interaction between us and the ships
that sail through the clouds is not a new phenomenon. It also indicates that the vision of
these "ships" was linked, in the popular mind, to atmospheric disturbances and to the
stealing of fruits, plants and animals by beings from the sky.
The reference to animals comes from a passage in a book by J. J. Ampere (in Histoire
Litteraire de la France): "it was believed that certain men, called Tempestaires,' raised
storms in order to sell the fruits hit by hail and the animals who had died as a result of
storms and floods to mysterious buyers who came by way of the air."
Most importantly, Agobard's book shows that as early as the ninth century there was
a belief in a separate region from whence these vessels sailed, and about the possibility for
men and women to travel with them. We must be thankful to him for saving the lives of
these four poor people, an episode that shows that the skeptics, in this field, can do some
good after all.
3

817, China, exact location unknown: Slow flying globe
A globe appeared at the zenith, followed by a tail. It flew slowly West under the moon,
while witnesses heard something like the sound of birds. We include the case because of
the slow motion noted in the report. It is rare, yet not impossible, to hear a sound in
connection with a meteor, but they do not fly "slowly."

1

Source: Abel Remusat, "Bolides en Chine," Journal de Physique (1819): 358.

Eginard writes that "terrible things in the sky" were observed during the night while Pepin
I was at war in Spain. The objects emitted lights, pale or red in color. Here again, the
interpretation is difficult: meteors are not "pale and red."
Source: Michel Bougard, Inforespace 22 (August 1975) :36, citing the Vita Hludowici Pii
by Astronomus (835 AD).

840, China, exact location unknown
Two "sacred lamps" astound the crowd
"Early that night, we saw a sacred lamp on top of the ridge, on the other side of a valley
East of the terrace. Our whole group saw it and admired it. The light was about the size of
a begging bowl at first, but it expanded to the size of a small house. Deeply moved, the
crowd sang with full voice the name of His Holiness. Then another lamp appeared, near
the valley. That one, too, only was the size of a rain straw hat at first, and then it grew
gradually. The two lights, when seen from afar, seemed about 100 steps apart. They were
shining ardently. At midnight they died, becoming invisible."
Source: Ennin, Journal d'un voyageur en Chine au IXieme siecle, trans. Roger Levy
(Paris: Albin Michel, 1961), 206.

November 879, China, exact location unknown
Two suns fighting
Two "suns" fought energetically in the sky. On another day of the same month, two Suns
fought, and then merged together. Note that a similar phenomenon is described in Japan in
case 69 below.

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 47.

Circa 25 April 880, Montserrat-Santa Cova, Spain
Magical light
Towards the end of April in the year 880 seven young children from Monistrol in
Barcelona saw a strange light descend from the sky and head towards a small grotto on the
mountain of Montserrat, accompanied by a soft melody. A week later a group of priests
headed by the Bishop of Manresa returned to the spot, and saw it again.

On four Saturdays in a row the light reappeared in the sky and dropped towards the

mountain grotto. In the end seven men were sent to the place the light seemed to indicate,
which was in an area called Santa Cova. When they entered the cave they discovered an
image of a black virgin, surrounded by a magical light and giving off a pleasant aroma.
The locals tried to carry the sculpture to Manresa but, according to their story, the further
they moved it, the heavier it became. It grew so heavy that they had to leave it in the
middle of the fields, where they decided to erect a hermitage in the name of St. Mary. The
hermitage is still there today.
62

Source: Josep Guijarro, Gufa de la Cataluna Magica (Barcelona: Ediciones Martinez
Roca, 1999), 42-43.

3 September 881, Japan, exact location unknown
Stellar maneuvers
Two stars appeared in the sky, and went through strange movements as if merging and
separating. This is the same pattern as in case 67, reported in China.

Source: Nihon-Tenmonshiriyou, by Morihiro Saito. We have looked in vain for an exact
reference. Perhaps one of our Japanese readers can research this case further?

March 900, China, exact location unknown
Two huge flying objects with complex shapes CD
The New Book of the Tang records that during the year of Guang Hua, "a fat star, as large
as 500 meters square, yellow in color, flew towards the southwest. It had a pointed head
and the rear was cylindrical..."
The same book records another "star-like object" that was five times bigger than the
above one and flew in a north-westerly direction. When it descended to a point some thirty
meters from the ground the witnesses could see its upper part emit red-orange flames. "It
moved like a snake, accompanied by numerous small stars that disappeared suddenly."

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 31.

905, China, location unknown
A globe and stars hover in the sky
A large fiery globe appeared at the zenith and flew towards the northwest. It stopped 100
feet away as many tiny stars moved above it. It left a greenish vapor.

Source: Abel Remusat, "Bolides en Chine" Journal de Physique (1819), 358.

919, Hungary: Bright spheres in the sky
People saw bright spherical objects shining like stars, along with a bright torch, moving to
and fro in the sky.

Source: Antonio Ribera, El gran enigma de los platillos volantes (Barcelona: Editorial
Plaza & Janes, 1974).
68.

12 May 922, Bulgaria: The Jinni in the red clouds
In July 921 the ambassador Susan ar-Rassi headed a mission that left Baghdad for Vulga
Bulgaria with the aim of seeking support from King Almush to form a military alliance
against Khazar Kaganate. On 12 May 922, the first night they spent in Almush's country,
a strange phenomenon was seen in the sky. The secretary of the mission, Ahmad ibnFadlan described the sighting thus:
"I saw that before the final disappearance of sunlight, at the usual hour of prayer, the

63

sky horizon reddened considerably. And I heard in the air loud sounds and a strong
hubbub. Then I lifted up my head and lo! A cloud [ was seen J not far from me, red like fire,
and this hubbub and these sounds came from it. And lo! [there were] seen in it something
like men and horses, and in the hands of some figures inside it, similar to men, [there

were] bows, arrows, spears, and naked swords. And they seemed to me sometimes

absolutely clear, sometimes just apparent. And lo! [there appeared] near them another
similar armed group, a black one, in which I also saw men, horses and weaponry. And this
detachment began to attack the other one, as a cavalry troop attacks another cavalry
troop."
The phenomenon lasted for some time. Ibn-Fadlan writes that the men asked the king
what it may have meant. The king replied that his forefathers, who were accustomed to
seeing such things, believed the riders were "Jinni" (Jinns). Ambassador ar-Rassi also
gave his version of the event. His account coincided with that of the secretary, except in
that he noticed two red clouds rather than one. He also noted that the sighting began an
hour before sunset and ended at around 1:00 A.M.

Source: A. Kovalevskiy, The book by Ahmad ibn-Fadlan about his voyage to the Volga in
the years 921-922. Papers, Translations, and Comments (Kharkov, 1956).

March 927, Reims, France: Armies of fire
"An army of fire was seen in the sky in Reims on a Sunday morning in the month of
March. After this sign a pestilence followed." This citation from Flodoard is an example
of a frequent description for which we have no precise correlation in terms of optical or
atmospheric phenomena.

Source: Flodoardi Annates, in Monumenta Germaniae Historiae, trans. G. H. Pertz, Tome
III (Hanover, 1839).

944, Trans-Rhenan Germany: Iron Globes chased away
"In some districts, burning iron globes were seen in the air, some of which, while flying,
burnt some farms and houses. But in some places they were repelled by opposing them
with crucifixes, episcopal blessing and holy water."

Source: Flodoardi Annates, in Monumenta Germaniae Historiae, trans. G. H. Pertz, Tome
III (Hanover, 1839).

9 September 967, Japan, exact location unknown
Triangular formation
Numerous objects in triangular formation flying under the rain clouds, trajectory east-

west. This description, if it is reliable, excludes the meteoric interpretation.
Source: Brothers III, 1, 1964. No original source given.

72.

989, Constantinople (Istanbul), Turkey
Erratic "comet"

"The star appeared in the west after sunset; it rose in the evening and had no fixed place in

the sky. It spread bright rays, visible from a great distance, and kept moving, appearing
further north or further south, and once when it rose changed its place in the sky, making

sudden and fast movements. The people who saw the comet (sic) were stunned, in awe,
and believe that such strange movements are an evil omen. And just as people expected,
something happened: in the evening of the day when they usually celebrated the memory
of Velikomuchenik (a martyr of early Christianity), a tremendous earthquake brought
down the towers of Byzantium..."
It seems to us today that an object that "changes its place in the sky, making sudden
and fast movements," cannot be a comet if the description is accurate. However Gary
Kronk's Cometography indicates that Halley's Comet was visible in the night sky during
July and August of 989, based on Chinese accounts, so some confusion is possible.
Source: Istoria ("History"), a 10th century manuscript by Byzantian writer Lev Diakon.
Quoted from a modern Russian edition: Lev Diakon, Istoria, trans. M. Kopylenko
(Moscow: G. Litavrin, 1988), 91.

3 August 989, Japan, exact location unknown
Three bright objects meet in the sky

"The three objects became bright, in extraordinary fashion, and met at the same point of
their trajectory."
Source: Christian Piens, Les Ovni du passe (Paris: Marabout, 1977), 41.

Circa 998, Budapest, Hungary
King Stephen's aerial trips
King Stephen (Istvan), who lived from 975 to 1038, and was crowned King of Hungary i§$
997, was said to be lifted to the sky with some frequency. His biographer, Chartruiz,
Bishop of Hungary, revealed that this sometimes happened spiritually and at other times
physically.

On one occasion, as detailed in Chartruis' Life of St. Stephen, King of Hungary.

"While praying in his tent, he was lifted into the air by the hands of angels."

Source: Ebenezer Cobham Brewer, A Dictionary of Miracles (London: Chatto & Windus,
1901), 217.

75.
Circa 999, Abbey of Saint-Leger, Cote d'Or, France
Bedroom visitation

Rodulphus Glaber, a monk and chronicler, writes "Not so long ago such (visions)
happened to me, by the favor of God. At the time I was staying in the monastery of the
martyr Saint-Leger, also named Abbaye de Champeaux. I saw one night, before Matines, a
hideous little monster of vaguely human form appear at the foot of my bed. It seemed to
be, as much as I could discern, of medium size with a frail neck, a thin face, very black
eyes, a wrinkled and narrow forehead, a goatee, straight and pointed ears, straight and
dirty hair, dog teeth, a sharp occiput, its breast swollen, a bump on the back, hanging
buttocks and dirty clothes, with its whole body appearing to shake.
"He grabbed the edge of the bed in which I was lying and shook it with terrible
violence and said: 'You will not stay here any longer.' And at once I woke up terrified,
and suddenly I saw the figure I just described. It was gnashing its teeth while repeating the
same thing: 'You will not stay here any longer.' I got up from bed at once and ran to the
monastery, where I kneeled in front of the altar of the very Holy Father Benedict,
extremely terrified. And I began to recall the offenses and serious sins I had committed by
being impudent or negligent."

Source: Rudolphi Glabri, Historiarum Libri Quinque ab anno incarnationis DCCC usque

ad annum MXLIV, book V, chapter I, paragraph 2.
According to Ernest Petit ("Raoul Glaber," in Revue Historique, XLVIII, 1892) Glaber
stayed in Saint-Leger between 997 and 1005 AD. This is the first of his visions. The five
books of his Historiae contain other such experiences as well as many anecdotic accounts
of superstitions around the year 1000.

Epilogue to Part I-A

66

What can we say about the above sightings? They range in credibility and significance
from curious events where a natural explanation is improbable (but not entirely
impossible, if some of the elements of the observation were reported mistakenly) to
extraordinary stories that have evoked paranormal, or even mystical interpretations among
the people of the time. All of them made enough of an impact for a record to have been
kept by the witnesses and later chroniclers. The very fact that they have come down to us
through so much troubled history is quite remarkable.
These reports do not constitute "evidence" for physical visitation by non-human
creatures. All we can say is that they are consistent with modern descriptions of
unidentified phenomena and the secondary effects surrounding them. In fact, we could
have stopped our work at the year 1000 and we would have presented a fair cross-section
of phenomena gathered by modern authors under the label of ufology, including
abductions and hard traces. These ancient records show how powerful the concept of such
intervention into human affairs can be: most of our religious texts today can be traced to
such events, and to the philosophical movements they triggered.
About the year 1000 many things changed on our planet. Large towns became real
cities; in Europe, the feudal system stabilized society. Stone castles and monasteries
would become genuine centers of learning while commerce expanded, bringing faraway
lands in more frequent contact with Europe. Even the Crusades, the source of so much
pillage and bloodshed, would soon play a role in creating an infrastructure for the
exchange of knowledge, the rudiments of international banking and the management of
67

complex projects. The nature of the reports will be even more intriguing and detailed in
the following sections.

PART I-B
Chronology: 1000 to 1500 AD
The Second Millennium opened with intense religious fervor: the world was in terrible
fear of cosmic upheaval, the Last Judgment and the end of the world, but a new spirit of
exploration also appeared: Viking Leif Ericson (c. 980-1020), the son of Eric the Red,
discovered America while Christianity reached Iceland and Greenland. The Chinese
perfected their invention of gunpowder. Normans extended their influence to England
after the battle of Hastings (1066). Conflict between different faiths intensified, leading in
1096 to the first of eight murderous Crusades that would force the blending of two great
civilizations and help introduce new philosophical ideas, including Hermeticism, into
European kingdoms barely emerging from the Dark Ages.
The rudiments of science arrived in Europe from the Middle East, with primitive
astronomical instruments, early tables of star positions, and knowledge of Greek medicine
and philosophy transmitted by Arabic scholars. The first cathedrals were built, the gothic
style appeared at Saint-Germain-des-Pres in Paris, and the first account of the use of a
mariner's compass was noted (in 1125). During the eleventh and twelfth centuries, a new
invention started its slow spread into Western Europe from Spain, with the adoption of
paper as a replacement for parchment. Far less expensive, paper greatly accelerated the
spread of knowledge. The twelfth century would also see the founding of Cambridge
University in England, the compilation of the Edda mythologies in Scandinavia, and the

teachings of Albertus Magnus. Early in the thirteenth century Fibonacci introduced Arabic
numerals into Europe, and the great University movements expanded in all countries, from
Brussels and Salisbury to Salamanca, Siena, Toulouse and Vicenza, supported by great
scholars like Roger Bacon (1214-1294). Libraries appeared everywhere, preserving
ancient knowledge and contemporary chronicles.
Travelers became increasingly ambitious, encouraged by Marco Polo's voyage to
China from 1271 to 1295. Knowledge about the world began circulating more widely,
while the Crusades ended (in 1291) with the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem settling in
Cyprus. Things took a disastrous turn in the mid-fourteenth century when the Black Death
devastated Europe, killing a third of the population of England (1347). Early in the
fifteenth century the Chinese compiled the first Encyclopedia (in 22,937 volumes!), a civil
war began in France, Joan of Arc led the French armies against England, and Portuguese
navigators found the first Negroes near Cap Blanc in western Africa, starting the slave
trade again.
Everything suddenly accelerated in the last years of the fifteenth century: Leonardo
da Vinci made his famed scientific discoveries, Copernicus studied at Cracow, the first
terrestrial globe was constructed in Nuremberg, Johan Gutenberg used metal plates for
printing and the king and queen of Spain, against the advice of their committee of experts,
financed the voyage of an Italian navigator named Christopher Columbus. The world had
changed.
69

76.

25 April 1001, Foggia, Italy
Strange flashes and a luminous lady

The count of Aviemore, tired after a day of hunting, decided to spend the night in a rustic
hut. In the middle of the night he was awakened by servants and friends frightened by
strange flashes, who urged the hunters to flee with them, fearing a forest fire. He decided
not to run away with his companions but to cautiously study the strange phenomenon.
Heading for the place where the flashes came from, the Count realized that there was no
fire or burning trees, but a strange light. Among the flashes he saw a beautiful lady, whom
he took to be the Virgin Mary.
A farmer named Nicholas, nicknamed Strazzacappa, who was going to work, saw the
vision as well and reportedly heard a request from the apparition for a place of worship to
be erected there. The case received publicity and a small chapel built at the spot became a
center of pilgrimage. After a few years the Verginiani, led by William of Vercelli, settled
there. When they merged with the Cistercians, the now famous monastery passed to the
care of these monks. The church was elevated to the dignity of basilica by Pope Paul VI
on 31 May 1978.
70

Source: Marino Gamba, Apparizioni mariane nel corso di due millenni (Udine: Ediz. II
Segno, 1999).

Circa 1010, Ostium, Italy
Five-year old child abducted
Peter Damian, Cardinal-Bishop of the Italian city of Ostium (1007-1072), recorded what
would be regarded today as a typical abduction involving the five-year-old son of a
nobleman: "One night he was carried out of the monastery into a locked mill, where he
was found in the morning. And when he was questioned, he said that he had been carried
by strangers to a great feast and bidden to eat; and afterwards he was put into the mill
through the roof."
What we see here is an early instance of a thread that will become increasingly
important as the chronology develops, focusing on alleged interaction between human
witnesses and creatures of another order. While a simplistic Christian interpretation
classifies them as "demons," more sophisticated scholars recognized they did not fit easily
within the biblical definitions of good and evil. In the Moslem world they would be
recognized as the Djinni. In the later medieval world they will become the Fairies, the
elves, the Elementals of the Alchemical tradition, the "Good Neighbors" of the Celtic
world. The parallels are obvious between the beliefs in such beings and contemporary
abduction stories made popular by television.
"Great feasts" are a staple of fairy folklore. Abductees were usually "bidden to eat"
when the fairies whisked them off to their hidden palaces, just as people often claim to be
given pills or liquids to swallow in today's accounts. Even being pulled, pushed or
dragged through the roof has its parallel in modern UFO lore.

Source: Malleus Maleficarum, written in 1486 by Heinrich Kramer and James Sprenger,
translated with an introduction, bibliography and notes by Montague Summers (London:
Bracken Books, 1996), 105. The works of S. Peter Damian, which have been more than
once collected, may be found in Migne, Patres Latini, CXLIV-CXLV.

7 July 1015, Kyoto, Western Japan
Objects emerge from mother stars'
4

The Director General of Saemonfu [the Royal Guard] said that he had witnessed two stars

meeting at night. " The circumstances were as follows: Both stars flew slowly towards
each other and the moment they were 10 meters or so from each other, there came little

stars rushing out of each big star, coming towards the other big star, and soon returned to
their respective mother star, then the two mother stars flew away swiftly. After this
meeting, clouds appeared and covered the sky. I hear that people in ancient times also
witnessed such a phenomenon, but recently it was so rare that I was impressed not a
little."
Source: Masaru Mori, "The Female Alien in a Hollow Vessel," Fortean Times, 48 (1987):
48; Inforespace 23:35.

79.
Autumn 1023, France: A ballet of stars

"There were seen in the southern part of the sky in the Sign of the Lion, two stars that
fought each other all Autumn; the largest and most luminous of the two came from the
east, the smallest one from the west, the small one rushed furiously and fearfully at the
biggest one which didn't allow the speck to approach, but he struck her with his mane of
light, repulsing her far towards the east."
Source: Ademar de Chabannes, Chronicon, book 3, ch. 62, in J. Chavanon, Ademarde
Chabannes, Chronique (Paris: A. Picard, 1897).

1036, Taichang, China
Bedroom visitation, abduction
A cloud carrying a female from the sky is said to have come down to the bedroom of
Wang's daughter and flown away with her. Chinese writer Sheng Gua reports: "Under the
reign of Jinyou (1034-1038) a scholar from Taichang named Wang Lun saw (goddess)
Zigu flying down into his daughter's bedroom. This goddess knew how to write and was
very pretty. A cloud floated under her feet, and she moved fast without effort. Zigu asked
Wang Lun's daughter: 'Do you want to travel with me?' She agreed with a sign of her
head. At once, clouds formed in the courtyard and the girl was lifted, but the clouds could
not carry her. Zigu said at once: 'There is dust on your shoes, take them off before coming
up.' The girl did as she was told and she rose in the clouds that lifted her to the sky."
72

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 27.
81.

1045, England: A "witch" gets abducted
"When Henrie the third of that name was Emperour of Rome, in England a certain
southsaying Witch was caried away by the Divel, whyche being drawen after him uppon
his horsse with a horrible crye, he caryed away up into the ayre, the cry of whiche old
woman was heard for certaine houres almost foure miles in that Countrey."
This constitutes only one of hundreds of similar stories about witches carried away by
paranormal means or by non-human beings, usually thought to be demonic.
Source: Lycosthenes, Prodigiorum ac Ostentorum Chronicon (Basel, 1557). Translation
from the Latin by Stephen Batman, The Doome, warning ali men to judgment... (London,
1581).

Ca. 1050, Vinland (Newfoundland): Woman in black

The Greenlanders Saga includes a report about a woman named Gudrid who was sitting
near the doorway beside the cradle of her son Snorri when "a shadow fell across the door
and a woman entered dressed in a black close-fitting dress. She was rather short, wore a
band round her head and had light-brown hair; she was pale and had such large eyes that
their equal had never been seen in a human head."
The entity walked over to where Gudrid was sitting and said: "What is your name?"
"My name is Gudrid, but what is your name?"
"My name is Gudrid," she replied.
"Then Gudrid the housewife held out her hand, that she should sit by her. But it
happened at the same moment, that Gudrid heard a great crack, and was then the woman
lost to sight, and at the same time one Skraling was killed by a house carle of Karlsefne's,
because he would have taken their weapons. And went they now away as usual, and their
clothes lay there behind, and their wares; no man had seen this woman, but Gudrid alone."
This episode, an early instance of the meme of a "Woman-in-black," took place in the
days of Thorfinn Karlsefni, the son of Thord Horsehead, the son of Snorri Thordason of
Hofdi. Karlsefni was a companion of Leif Eirikson at Brattahlid. The two authors have
disagreed about this case, since it could be considered a ghost story rather than a UFO
case, but numerous modern claims of alien visitation fall in the same category and follow
the identical model.
73

Source: Helge Ingstad, Westward to Vinland (London: Jonathan Cape, 1969).
83.

14 April 1054, Rome, Italy
A bright circle in the midday sky
In their paper "Do We Need to Redate the Birth of the Crab Nebula?" astronomers
Guidoboni, Marmo, and Polcaro quote from the Tractatus de Ecclesia S. Petri
Aldeburgensi, written by a monk or a clerk of the church of St. Peter in the town of
Oudenburg, in present-day Belgium, regarding aerial phenomena observed at the time of
the death of Pope Leo IX. They argue that the event described was a supernova, which is
possible but unlikely.
"The most blessed Pope Leo, after the beginning of the construction of the
aforementioned church of St. Peter, in the following year, on the 18th day before the first
of May (i.e., 14 April 1054), a Monday, around midday, happily departed this world.
And at the same time and hour as his leaving of the flesh, not only in Rome, where his
body lies, but also all over the world appeared to men a circle in the sky of extraordinary
brightness which lasted for about half an hour. Perhaps the Lord wished to say that he [the
Pope] was worthy to receive a crown in Heaven between those who love Him."
The supernova that gave rise to the Crab Nebula was first seen by Chinese
astronomers who noted a "guest star" in the constellation Taurus on July 4, 1054, fully
three months after the Rome sighting. Simon Mitton lists 5 independent preserved FarEast records of this event (one of 75 authentic guest stars - novae and supernovae,
excluding comets - systematically recorded by Chinese astronomers between 532 BC and
1064 AD). This star became about 4 times brighter than Venus in its brightest light, or
about magnitude -6, and was visible in daylight for 23 days. It was probably also recorded
by Anasazi Indian artists (in present-day Arizona and New Mexico), as findings in
Navaho Canyon and White Mesa as well as in the Chaco Canyon National Park (New
Mexico) indicate.
th

74

The astronomers note that the English translation of the Latin terms "circulus" and
"corona" is not perfect, because they do not convey the original sense of "disc" that the
Flemish writer expressed in his text. "The fact that corona was conceived as a bright disk
(or shield) makes us understand that also circulus in this context must mean the same
object. In conclusion, the Flemish chronicler saw a bright disk in the sky, and not a halo.
Furthermore, we can observe that in this document, the author describes the phenomenon
in neutral terms, unaffected by any set of beliefs: the disk-like shape, the intense
brightness and the duration of the phenomenon are all elements common to very different
cultures. The author separates the description of the phenomenon from his cautious
symbolic interpretation, showing a clear awareness of the different levels of discourse."
Note that the text of the Tractatus does not give the correct date for the Pope's death,
which was 19 April 1054.
Source: E. Guibodoni, C. Marmo and V.F. Polcaro, "Do we Need to Redate the Birth of

the Carb Nebula?" Memorie della Societa Astronomica Italiana 65 (1994): 624.
Circa 1059, Fanliang, China
The bright pearl in the lake

Sheng Gua, a Chinese scholar of the Song Dynasty, recorded an interesting sighting in

Chapter 369 of his Stories on the Bank of a Stream of Dreams:

"In the middle of the reign of emperor Jia You [1056-1063], at Yangzhou, in the
Jiangsu province, an enormous pearl was seen especially in gloomy weather. At first it
appeared in the marsh of the Tianchang district, passed by the lake of Bishe and
disappeared finally in the Xinkai lake. The inhabitants of that region and travelers saw it

frequently over a period of ten years. I have a friend who lives on the edge of the lake.
One evening, he looked through the window and saw the luminous pearl near his house.
He half-opened his door and the light entered, illuminating the room with its brightness.

The pearl was round, with a gold-colored ring around it. Suddenly, it enlarged
considerably and became bigger than a table. In its centre, the luminary was white and
silvery, and the intensity was such that it could not be looked at straight on."

75

The light it emitted even reached trees that were some 5 kilometers away and as a
result these cast their shadow on the ground; the faraway sky was all alight. Finally, the
round luminous object began to move at a breathtaking speed and landed on the water
between the waves, like a rising sun.
As the pearl often made its appearance in the town of Fanliang in Yangzhou, the
inhabitants, who had seen it frequently, built a wayside pavilion and named it "The Pearl
Pavilion." Inquisitive people often came from afar by boat, waiting for a chance to see the
unpredictable pearl.
Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 26. The case is also mentioned by

Paul Dong in China's Major Mysteries: Paranormal Phenomena and the Unexplained in

the People's Republic of China (China Books, 2000), 69-71. Dong quotes from an article
in Peking's Guang Ming Daily of February 18th 1979, "Could It Be That a Visitor from
Outer Space Visited China Long Long Ago?" written by Professor Zhang Longqiao of the
Chinese department of Peking Teachers College. The actual account comes from the book
"Meng Qi Bi Tan" ("Essays of the Meng Hall") by Shen Kua of the Song Dynasty
(960-1127).

1067, Northumbria, England
Fiery sign revolves, moves up and down
"In this year, truly, several people saw a sign; in appearance it was fire: it flamed and
burned fiercely in the air; it came near to the earth, and for a little time quite illuminated
it; afterwards it revolved and ascended up on high, then descended into the bottom of the

sea; in several places it burned woods and plains. No man knew with certainty what this

divined, nor what this sign signified. In the country of the Northumbrians this fire showed
itself; and in two seasons of one year were these demonstrations."

The original account, in Gaimar's History of the English (in Chronicles and
Memorials of Great Britain and Ireland during the Middle Ages. London: Her Majesty's
Stationery Office, 1889, Kraus reprint, 1966) runs thus:

76

Many folks saw a sign
In likeness of fire it was,
In the air it greatly flamed and burned:
Towards the earth it approached,
For a little it quite lighted up.
Then it revolved above,
Then fell into the deep sea.
In many places it burnt woods and plains.
Source: C. E. Britton, A Meteorological Chronology to A.D. 1450 (London: H.M.S.O.,
1937), 44. Britton comments: "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle gives the date of the return from
Normandy as December 6 but does not mention the auroral appearances." Also mentioned

by Geoffrey Gaimar in L Estoire des Engles solum la Translacion Maistre Geffri Gaimar,

a 12th century manuscript.

December 1071, Zhengjiang, China
Light rising from the river
Scholar Su Dongpo saw a big light emerge from the Yangtse River, scaring away the
mountain birds.

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 26.

87.
July 1085, Estella, Navarra, Spain: A great star, and the Holy Virgin
Estella, in Navarra, is another place named after an unusual aerial sighting. The Virgin
and a great star are said to have appeared to a group of shepherds on the mountain. The
consequent worship of the area brought in pilgrims by the hundreds and King Sancho
Ramirez built a sanctuary there. A sign on its capilla reads:

Esta es la estrella
Que bajd del Cielo
a Estella
Para reparo de ella.

This is the star
That came down from the Sky
to Estella
To observe it.

Source: Javier Sierra and Jesus Callejo, La Espana Extraha (Madrid: Editorial EDAF,
1997), 131-2.

1092, Drutsk and Polotsk, Ukraine
First reference to the Devil's Hunt

88.

A common theme in ancient folklore refers to mysterious sounds in the sky reminding
terrified people of the passage of dozens of men on horseback riding at full speed, with
their dogs and servants, leaving enormous destruction behind. In this particular account
the phenomenon first appeared in Drutsk, as a great sign "like a very large circle in the
middle of the sky." That summer the weather was very dry, with numerous forest fires and
many deaths. In Polotsk people heard great noises in the night, seemingly of devils
galloping along the streets. Later they manifested during the day on horseback, but the
only visible part was the hooves of their horses.
Another version of the text (Radziwill's) suggests that "the people of Polotsk are
devoured by the dead," showing ambiguity between the deceased and demons. It is related
77

in the Povest' vremennykh let, usually referred as the Nestor's Chronicle or Chronicle of

Bygone Years. The following text was extracted by Yannis Deliyannis from the
Laurentian codex (J1<*BPCHTI>CBCKHH CIIHCOK) which includes the oldest version of the
Povest' vremmenykh let. Apart from the manifestation of demons in the streets of Polotsk,
the reference to the appearance of a 'great circle' in the sky is of particular interest.

Fig. 7: An illumination from the Radziwill Chronicle.
The text reads: "Year 6600 (note: since the creation of the world in 5500 BC) This year
there was a very peculiar prodigy in Polotsk. At night, a great noise was heard in the
street: demons ran like men and if someone went out of his house, he was hurt right away
by an invisible demon with a deadly wound. No one dared to leave his house. Then the
demons manifested themselves on horses in plain day: they could not be seen themselves
but only the hooves of their horses. They also hurt people in Polotsk and in the
neighbourhood. So it was said: "There are ghosts killing citizens in Polotsk". These
apparitions began in Droutchesk. Around this time a sign appeared in the heavens. A great
circle was seen in the middle of the sky."

Source: Claude Lecouteux, Chasses fantastiques et cohortes de la nuit au Moyen Age
(Paris: Imago, 1999), 31-32, quoting La Chronique des Temps Passes. See also, in
Russian,
(Povest' vremennykh let) as published in

CCCP, 1926-1928.

July 1096, Japan, exact location unknown
A necklace of ten lights in the sky CD
Ten flying objects combined to form a necklace in the sky in the northwest. In the absence
of an original quote, it is impossible to analyze this event further.
Source: Takao Ikeda, Nihon nu ufo (Tokyo: Tairiku shobo, 1974).

78

Circa 15 September 1098, Antioch, Turkey
Scintillating globe
In the Historia Francorum qui Ceperint Jerusalem of Raymond d'Aguiliers, Count of

Toulouse, we read that during the First Crusade: "very many things were revealed to us
through our brethren; and we beheld a marvelous sign in the sky. For during the night
there stood over the city a very large star, which, after a short time, divided into three parts
and fell in the camp of the Turks."
Alfred of Aachen writes: "In the silence of the night, when benevolent sleep restores
men's strength, all Christians on guard duty were struck by a marvelous sight in the sky. It
seemed that all the stars were concentrated in a dense group, in a space the size of about

three arpents, fiery and bright as coals in a furnace, and gathered as a globe, scintillating.
And after burning for a long time, they thinned out and formed the likeness of a crown,
exactly above the city; and after remaining for a long time gathered in a circle without
separating, they broke the chain at a point on that circle, and all followed the same path."

Source: August C. Krey, The First Crusade: The Accounts of Eyewitnesses and
Participants (Princeton, 1921); Albert d'Aix, Aiberti Aquensis Historia Hierosolymitana
in Recueil des Historiens des Croisades. Historiens Occidentaux. RHC. OCCO Tome IV,
265-715. Translation by Yannis Deliyannis.

Circa 1100, Germany
Prodigies herald the coming Crusade
"The signs in the sun and the wonders which appeared, both in the air and on the earth,
aroused many who had previously been indifferent...A few years ago a priest of
honorable reputation, by the name of Suigger, about the ninth hour of the day beheld two
knights, who met one another in the air and fought long, until one, who carried a great
cross with which he struck the other, finally overcame his enemy...Some who were
watching horses in the fields reported that they had seen the image of a city in the air and
had observed how various troops from different directions, both on horseback and on foot,
were hastening thither.
"Many, moreover, displayed, either on their clothing, or upon their forehead, or
elsewhere on their body, the sign of the cross, which had been divinely imprinted, and
they believed themselves on this account to have been destined to the service of God."
79

Source: Ekkehard of Aurach. On the Opening of the First Crusade (1101).

11 February 1110, Pechorsky Monastery, Russia
A fiery pillar
There was an omen in the Pechorsky monastery: "On February 11th there appeared a fiery
pillar that reached from the ground to the sky, and lightning lit all earth, and thunder
rattled at the first hour of night, and everyone saw it. The pillar first stood over the stone
trapeznitsa (monastery dining room), blocking the sight of the cross, and, after a short
while, moved to the church and stood over Feodosiev's (Theodosius) tomb; it then went to
the top of the church, turning its face to the east, and afterwards made itself invisible."
The record reads: "It wasn't an usual fiery column, but the apparition of an angel, because
angels often appeared as a fiery column or a flame."
Source: Nestor, Russian Primary Chronicle (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1930), 296-297. The date is sometimes given as 1111.

1130, Bohemia, Czechoslovakia
Flying "serpent" in the sky

93.

"A sign (or "a monster") resembling a flying serpent" is said to have flown over Bohemia,
and was recorded by two separate historians. This could have been a natural phenomenon.

Source: Czech magazine Vecerni Praha, quoted in The Washington Post, August 2, 1967.
The original sources are Canonici Wissegradensis Continuatio Cosmae, in Monumenta
Germaniae Historica (MGH) SS 9, 136 and Annates Gradicences in MGH SS 17, 650.

12 August 1133, Japan, exact location unknown
Close encounter
A large silvery object is reported to have come down close to the ground. We have failed
to locate an actual quote, so we give this case with reservations.
Source: Morihiro Saito, Nihon-Tenmonshiriyou, chapter 7.

1142, Bohemia, Czechoslovakia: Flying "dragon"

Similar to the case from 1130, a phenomenon described as a "flying dragon" flew over
Bohemia.

80

Source: Czech magazine Vecerni Praha, quoted in The Washington Post, August 2, 1967.
Original: Monachi Sazavensis, cont. Cosmae (a. 932-1162), in MGH SS 9, 159.

1155, Rome, Italy
Three lights and a cross in the sky
During the coronation of Federico (Frederick) Barbarossa by Pope Eugene III "there
appeared in the sky three lights, and a cross formed by stars."
Source: B. Capone, "Luci dallo Spazio" in II Giornale dei Misteri, Dec. 1972, which gives
the year as 1152. While Barbarossa was declared king of the Holy Roman Empire in that
year, the coronation did not actually take place until 1155 because of widespread unrest
within the lands he supposedly controlled, and the disloyalty of his rival Henry the Lion.
We hope that future researchers will be able to trace a more precise reference.

1161, Thann, Alsace, France
Three lights in the sky

97.

Three lights or luminous objects were observed by the Lord of Engelburg over the village
of Thann, in Alsace, in 1161. A servant of Ubald, bishop of Ombrie, had stolen a relic
from the Saint's body, hiding it in his walking stick, which he planted in the ground next
to a pine tree. Three aerial lights were seen coming over the top of the tree. The next
morning the servant found his stick immobilized and was unable to pick it up. This
impressed people so much that they built a chapel to commemorate the 'miracle.'
Each year in Thann, on the 30 of June, three fir-trees (in reference to the three
lights) are cremated in front of the main church in celebration of this foundation legend.
The celebration is known as the "cremation des trois sapins" and still occurs today.
th

Source: Johannes Andreas Schenck, Sanctus Theobaldus (Freiburg, 1628).

25 December 1167, England, location unknown
Two objects
Two "stars" appear on Christmas Day. The actual quote is from Nicholas Trivetus
(Annales): "At the watch night (vigilia) of the Lord's Nativity, two fiery stars appeared in
the western sky. One was large, the other small. At first, they appeared joined together.
Afterwards, they were for a long time separated distinctly." It is probable, but not certain?
that the sighting was made in England.
Source: Nicholas Trivetus (1258-1328), Annates sexregum Angttae. Trivetus was not
contemporary with the event, so he must have copied it from an older chronicle.

1

1169, China, location unknown
Wheels fall off as two dragons fly away

99.

In the history of the Song Dynasty it is written that in the fifth year of the K'ien Tao (now
known as Qiandao) era, which corresponds with 1169 AD, dragons were seen battling in
the sky during a thunderstorm:

"Two dragons fled and pearls like carriage wheels fell down on the ground, where

herds' boys found them."

Source: Dr. M. W. De Visser, The Dragon in China and Japan (Amsterdam: Johannes
Muller, 1913), 48. Visser quotes from "the Wu ki."

1171, Teruel, Aragon, Spain
The King observes a mystery

100.

Alfonso II and his men observed a wandering bull and a mysterious, star-like luminous
object hovering above. As described in a current historical brochure about the town,
"Tradition says that in the XII century, during the Reconquest of Spain, King Alfonso II,
after taking several important positions, continued along the banks of the River Martin and
upon reaching what is now Teruel, he split his army up, leaving part of his warriors in the
Cella Plains with orders to remain on the defensive, and he then proceeded to confront the
rebels in the mountains of Prades. This is the point where history and legend blend

together. The warriors disobeyed the king's orders and ran after a bull that was being
followed by a star from heaven because they had seen it in premonitory dreams: a sign,
according to them, which marked the place where a new town was to be established. In
this way they took the fortress of Teruel planting their banner in the conquered fortress."

it.

This fact is still represented today on the shield of Teruel, with a bull and a star above

Source: Javier Sierra and Jesus Callejo, La Espana Extrana (Madrid: Ediciones EDAF,
1997), 122-4.

18 June 1178, Canterbury, England: cosmic catastrophe

82

Gervase of Canterbury wrote that about an hour after sunset five witnesses watched as the
upper horn of the bright new moon suddenly split in two. From the midpoint of this
division a flaming torch sprang up, spewing out fire, hot coals and sparks. The moon

"writhed [and] throbbed like a wounded snake." This happened a dozen times or more,
"turning the moon blackish along its whole length."
When a geologist suggested in 1976 that Gervase's account referred to the meteor
impact that created the 22 kilometer lunar crater called Giordano Bruno, the theory was
widely accepted. However, as reported in several scientific journals in 2001, new
calculations show that such an event would have resulted in a fierce, week-long meteor
storm on Earth with 100 million of tons of ejecta raining down on our planet. Of course,
this did not take place in the twelfth century AD, or archives all over the world would
have recorded it! This begs the question "What did Gervase's contemporaries really see?"
Did they observe the dramatic entrance of a comet into the Earth's atmosphere - or
something even stranger? Were they even looking at the moon?
Source: University of Arizona news release dated 19 April 2001. The BBC website posted
a report on May 1st, 2001: "Historic lunar impact
questioned" (http://news.bbc.co.Uk/2/hi/science/natiire/1304985.stm).

27 October 1180, Kii Sanchi, Nara, Japan
Glowing vessel
A glowing "earthenware vessel" (a saucer?) maneuvers in the sky between the mountains
of Kyushu, flies off to the northeast towards Mount Fukuhara. It changes course abruptly,
turns south and disappears with a luminous trail.

Source: Sobeps (Societe Beige pour 1'Etude des Phenomenes Spatiaux), Inforespace 23;

Brothers III, 1 (1964).

1182, Friesland, Holland
Four suns, armed men in the sky

103.

The Chronicler Winsemius (1622) reports, in his Croniek van Vriesland that four Suns and
a score of armed men were seen in the sky and a bloody rain fell.

Source: M.D. Teenstra, Volksverhalen en Legenden van vroegere en latere dagen
(Geertsema: Groningen, 1843), 117.

1185, Mount Nyoigadake, Japan
A luminous wheel enters the sea

104.

First there were red beams behind the mountain, and then an object like a luminous wheel
flew over, and entered the sea. The witnesses were fishermen.

Source: Brothers Magazine III, 1, 1964.

105.

9 August 1189, Dunstaple, Bedfordshire, England
Marvelous vision
Numerous amazed observers see the sky "open up" as a huge cross hovers till midnight.
The British monastic chronicler William of Newburgh (1136-1198) noted the

sightings of several prodigies in the sky in his Historic rerum anglicarum, a philosophical

commentary dealing with his own times. In chapter four of Book VI, we read:
"Nor ought I to pass over in silence a most amazing and fearful prodigy, which about
this time was seen in England by many, who to this day are witnesses of it to those who
did not see it. There is upon the public road which goes to London a town, by no means
insignificant, called Dunstaple.
"There, as certain persons happened to be looking up at the sky in the afternoon, they
saw in the clear atmosphere the form of the banner of the Lord, conspicuous by its milky
whiteness, and joined to it the figure of a man crucified, such as is painted in the church in
remembrance of the passion of the Lord, and for the devotion of the faithful (...)
"When this fearful sight had thus been visible for some time, and the countenances
and minds of those who were curiously watching it were kept in suspense, the form of the
cross was seen to recede from the person who seemed affixed to it, so that an intermediate
space of air could be observed between them; and soon afterwards this marvelous vision
disappeared; but the effect remained, after the cause of this prodigy was removed."
Other sources: the case is also mentioned by writers Thomas Wykes (with a date of 1191),
Wilhelmus Parvus, and Walther of Hermingford (the latter two give a year of 1189).
106.

June 1193, London, England
Bright white ball of light, hovering
"On the 7th of the Ides of June, at 6 o'Clock, a thick black Cloud rose in the Air, the Sun
shining clear all round about. In the middle of the Cloud was an Opening, out of which
proceeded a bright Whiteness, which hung in a Ball under the black Cloud over the Side
of the Thames, and the Bishop of Norwich's Palace."

84

Source: Thomas Short, A general chronological history of the air, weather, seasons,
meteors, &c. in sundry places and different times (1749).
Late December 1200, Yorkshire, England
Five Moons in formation
"In the third year of John, King of England, there were seen in Yorkshire five Moons; one

in the East, the second in the West, the third in the North, the fourth in the South, and the
fifth (as it were) set in the midst of the other, having many Blazing Stars about it, and went

five or six times encompassing the other, as it were the space of one hour, and shortly
after vanished away."

Source: William Knight, " Mementos to the World, or, An historical collection of divers
wonderful comets and prodigious signs in heaven..." (printed by T. Haly, for T. Passinger,
London, 1681).

Note: King John reigned from April 6, 1199 until his death in 1216. The third year of
his reign would therefore correspond with 1202 AD. However, another writer, Roger de
Hoveden, states it occurred "a little before the Nativity of the Lord," 1200. As Hoveden
himself died in 1201, we think the sighting probably took place in King John's second
year of reign.

14 September 1224, Mount Alverne, Italy
Mystical light, visitation
Brother Leo saw a ball of light suspended above St. Francis of Assisi while he conversed
with an invisible being. "He heard voices which made questions and answers; and he
remarked that Francis, who was prostrate, often repeated these words: 'Who are you, o my
God? And my dear Lord? And who am I? a worm, and Thy unworthy servant.' He also
saw him put his hand out three times into his bosom, and each time stretch it out to the
flame. The light disappeared, the conversation ceased."
This kind of narrative bridges the gap between lights and objects that fly through the
atmosphere, reports of luminous orbs at ground level and "earth lights" over special spots.
Here we have a ball of light (observed by an external witness) over a man who appears ii§
communication with it, hence the relevance to our study.
5

Source: Father Candide Chalippe, The Life and Legends of Saint Francis of Assisi
(Teddington: Echo Library, 2007), 191-2.

3 May 1232, Caravaca, Spain
Lights, and an "angel" brings a cross

109.

Luminous phenomena attend a double-armed cross apparently brought down by an entity
assumed to be an angel. The religious context surrounding the observation has enabled it
to survive as a legend, told by multiple authors. Traditionally, the most authoritative of
them is considered to be the 13 century Franciscan Juan Gil (Egidio) de Zamora. He
relates that the cross was brought inside the church by two angels. The current
whereabouts of the artifact are equally uncertain. The cross that can be seen today in the
sanctuary in Caravaca is a copy, the original having been stolen in 1934, probably by a
cult.
th

Source: Clara Tahoces, "Caravaca, jQue Cruz!" Mas Alia 127 (September 1999).

2 October 1235, Japan: circling lights in the sky
About 8 P.M., by clear sky, a fortune teller named Suketoshi Abe, consultant to Shogun
(Warlord) Yoritsune Fujiwara, reported to his palace that mysterious sources of light had
been seen swinging and circling in the southwest. These lights moved in loops until the
early hours of the morning. Yoritsune ordered an investigation and his astrology
consultants, who were skilled in astronomy, conducted the study: "It is only the wind
making the stars sway," they reported after hearing the statements of Suketoshi Abe.

With arrogance worthy of our modern academic experts, they even suggested that he
should write a letter of apology. A high government official, Yasutoki Houjo, denied their
request.
Source: This case is mentioned in the Japanese magazine Brothers (No. I) and by one of
us (Vallee) in Anatomy of a Phenomenon (1965) with an incorrect date. The original
source is the book Azumakagami, edited in 1605 (see Shlnjinbutuouraisha, vol. 4, 1977).
Azumakagami means "Mirror of the East." It was a chronicle covering the period 1180 t(§
1266, and was compiled after 1266 under the directive of the Hojo regent. It is usually
written in two words: Azuma Agami.

6

1237, El Puig, Valencia: A fleet of seven lights
According to one record, seven mysterious lights in the night sky were seen on four
Saturdays in a row. They appeared to be falling from the sky and entering the earth at a
particular spot. Quoting from Tirso de Molina's Historia de la Orden de la Merced, the
chronicle in which the story was originally written:
"The sentries and custodians of the castle [at El Puig] observed that every Saturday,
at midnight, a fleet of luminous stars, seven in number, consecutively descended upon the
summit nearest the said fortress, in the same place where our monastery now lies." When
the guards informed their masters, Pedro Nolasco (1189-1256) and the mayor, supposing
that the phenomenon was trying to announce something important, went up to the site
together and carefully excavated the spot.

Whether by some amazing coincidence or divine providence it did not take too long
to find a hidden treasure: a bell, and below that a sculpted image of the Virgin Mary.
Nolasco thanked the angels for the wondrous gifts and a little time afterwards constructed
an altar at the spot.
Source: Tirso De Molina, Historic de la Orden de la Merced (1637). Today the monastery
has a website: www.monasteriodelpuig.es.tl.

24 July 1239, France
A great light, ascending
"On July 24, 1239, at dusk, but not when the stars came out, while the air was clear,
serene and shining, a great star appeared. It was like a torch rising from the south, and

flying on both sides of it, there was emitted in the height of the sky a very great light. It
turned quickly towards the north in the aerie region, not quickly, nor, indeed, with speed,
but exactly as if it wished to ascend to a place high in the air. "
This sequence of motion is not typical of a natural phenomenon, and it certainly was
not a "star."
Source: Matthew Paris, Chronica Majora (London: Longman, 1880), vol. 3, 566.
113.

1252, Padua, Italy: Flying light, seen for an hour

87

This event is described in the Cronaca di Rolandino da Padova, where a witness reports:
"A certain great star, like a comet, but it was not a comet because it did not have a tail
and it was a portentous thing because it looked almost as large as the moon, and it moved
faster than the moon, but as fast as falling stars, and indeed it was not the moon. It was
observable for an hour and then it vanished."
This object, as described, was not a comet or a meteor.
Source: U. DaH'Olmo, "Meteors, meteor showers and meteorites in the Middle Ages:
From European medieval sources," Journal for the History of Astronomy 9 (1978).

14 October 1253, England: A battle of stars
Nicholas of Findern reported to Burton Abbey that "About the hour of vespers, the sky
being clear, suddenly a large bright star appeared out of a black cloud with two smaller
stars in the vicinity. A battle royal soon commenced, the small stars charging the great star
again and again, so that it began to diminish in size, and sparks of fire fell from the
combatants. This continued for a considerable time, and at last, the spectators, stupefied,
by fear and wonder, and ignorant of what it might portend, fled."

Source: Annales de Burton, in H. R. Luard, ed., Annales Monastici vol 1 (London:
HMSO, 1864).

12 September 1271, Japan
Saved from execution by a flying sphere!
At midnight one of Japan's greatest saints, Nichiren Shonin (1222-1282), was being
escorted to the beach to be executed. Just before the fatal moment, a brilliant sphere as
large as the moon flew over, illuminating the landscape. The authorities were so
frightened by the apparition that they changed their minds about putting Shonin to death.
Instead, they exiled him to Sado Island, though this did not prevent his teachings from
spreading. A branch of his teachings, the Sokka-Gakkei, has millions of adherents
throughout the world today.

Source: Rev. Ryuei Michael McCormick, Lotus Seeds: The Essence of Nichiren Shu
Buddhis (Nichiren Buddhist Temple of San Jose, 2000).

1273, Naples, Italy
A light enters the bedroom of a sick man
The biography of St. Thomas Aquinas (ca. 1225 to 7 March 1274) states that on the year
before his death he returned to Naples, staying in that city for a few weeks during an
illness. While he was there two monks saw a light described as a big star coming through
the window. It rested for a moment on the head of the sick man and disappeared again,
just as it came.

88

The link with ufology here is very much open to debate, yet abduction researchers
have been looking into stories of this kind with increasing interest.
Source: Antonio Borrelli, "San Tommaso d'Aquino Sacerdote e dottore della Chiesa,"
citing the Life of Saint Thomas Aquinas.
www.santiebeati.it/dettaRlio/22550.

3 June 1277, China, location unknown
Strange event seen at dawn
An unknown object was immortalized in a poem by Liou Ying, a Chinese poet of the
Yuan Dynasty. The title of the poem, which can be found in chapter three of The Yuan
Literature Collection, was simply "Event Seen at Dawn."
"I rise at dawn and, through the window, I see a very bright star that crosses the
Milky Way. Now I see three luminous objects appear in the southern sky, of which two fly
away and disappear suddenly from my sight. The one which remains possesses five
unequalled lights beneath it, and above its upper part I see something in the form of a
dome. The unknown object begins to move in a zigzag, like a dead leaf. At the same time,
some fiery thing falls from the sky. A short time afterwards, the sun rises but its brightness
is dulled by the luminous object that moves quickly in a northerly direction. In the western
sky, a green cloud is suddenly disturbed by another unknown object, oval in shape, flat,
that descends quickly. This object is more than three metres long, and is surrounded by
flames. It rises again shortly after its descent.
"In view of this splendid and amazing spectacle, I rush to the village to alert the
inhabitants. When my friends come out of their houses, the flying machine has

disappeared. After the event, I reflect on it very much but do not find a reasonable
explanation. I have the impression I have come out of a long dream. I hasten to write
down all that I have seen at the time so that whoever understands these events can give me
an explanation."

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 37.

Circa 1284, Parma, Saint Rufiino, Italy
A duel of stars
On 6 August 1284 the naval battle of the Meloria, between the forces of Genoa and
Pisa, took place. It is said in the Chronicon Parmesan, of the Franciscan monk Salimbene
de Adam (1221-1287):
"It should be known that this battle and massacre between the Genovesi and Pisani
had already been foretold and announced long before it happened. In the town of Saint
Ruffino, in the diocese of Parma, some women peeled [washed?] the linen at night: and
they saw two great stars meeting in the sky. They drew away from each other and still
collided again, and chased one another, and more than once..."

Source: Giuseppe Scalia, ed., Cronica Fratris Salimbene de Adam ordinis minorum
(Laterza, 1966).

3 August 1294, Japan, exact location unknown
Red shining object
During a parade, a red shining object appeared, coming from the direction of a shrine. It
resembled the Moon, and flew north.
Source: Morihiro Saito, Nihon-Tenmonshiriyou. Chapter 7, "Meteor, the Messenger from
Space."

May 1295,1 Hing, China
Two flying Dragons fall into a Lake

120.

A strange phenomenon was witnessed in the fifth month of the year yih-wei, which
corresponds with 1295:
"In a short time a heavy wind came riding on the water, reaching a height of more
than a chang (ten ch'ih or feet). Then there fell from the sky more than ten fire balls,
having the size of houses of ten divisions. The two dragons immediately ascended (to the
sky), for Heaven, afraid that they might cause calamity, sent out sacred fire to drive them
away."
The 14th-century chronicler of this incident, Cheu Mih, adds that he had personally
observed the results of another 'dragonfall.' Seeing the scorched paddy fields of the Peach
garden of The Ts'ing, he interviewed one of the villagers. "Yesterday noon a big dragon

fell from the sky," he was told. "Immediately he was burned by terrestrial fire and flew
away. For what the dragons fear is fire."

90

Source: M. W. De Visser, The Dragon in China and Japan (Amsterdam: Johannes Miiller,
1913), 48-49.

8 September 1296, Loreto, Italy
Globes of light, and an elliptical object
Before dawn, mysterious globes of light appeared repeatedly in the sky of Loreto, falling,
stopping and disappearing suddenly. The phenomenon was witnessed by a hermit, Paul
Selva, who wrote a famous letter to Charles II dated June 1297. The phenomenon
appeared as a body of elliptical shape. A writer named Mantovano who obtained the
information from a record dating back to 1300, notes: "He saw a light in the shape of a
very bright comet measuring twelve feet in length and six in width, coming down from
heaven in the direction of the church and after it approached, vanished at the site." The
object, obviously, was not a comet.

Sources: G. Garrat, Loreto, nuova Nazaret (Recanati, 1894); O. Torsellini, Laurentana
istoria, trans. B. Quatrini (Bologna, 1894).

24 December 1299, Tier (Treves), Germany
Globes of light, and an elliptical object
The Chronicle of the Archbishops of Trier, the Gesta Trevirensium Archiepiscoporum,
makes an interesting reference to an object in the sky. The term they employed, cometa,
could actually refer to virtually any luminous body in the sky, not necessarily to a comet
as we define it today. In fact, this particular "comet" behaved very strangely.
It was just after midnight. The sky was unusually misty and a foggy frost covered the
land.
"Inside the darkness itself, a comet the size of the moon appeared as if hanging in the
air, tinted by an ardent redness and which disappeared after an hour. And again, inbetween a small interval, two comets appeared simultaneously a short distance from one
another, exhibiting the same size and color as earlier; but they disappeared immediately. A
third time, after a short hour, [another] one appeared, in all respects visible in the size and
color of its predecessors, and which also vanished immediately."

Source: Gesta Trevirensium Archiepiscoporum, in E. Martene and U. Durand, Veterum
Scriptorum et Monumentorum...amplissima collection, vol. IV (Paris, 1729, Col. 370).
1320, Durham, Saint Leonard, England
Luminous phenomenon over a the burial site
Upon the death of the Abbott of Saint Gregory monastery, an unknown object ("a great
light") lit up the sky over his burial site in Saint Leonard. Later it came lower, moved

91

away and disappeared. The symbolic meaning of this event leaves its connection with
ufology open to debate.
Source: Robert de Graytanes, Historia Dunelmensis. As published in Historiae
Dunelmensis Scriptores tres (London-Edinburgh: Publications of the Surtees Society,
1839).

4 November 1322, Uxbndge, England
A pillar with a red flame
"In the first hour of the night there was seen in the sky over Uxbridge a pillar of fire the
size of a small boat, pallid, and livid in color. It rose from the south, crossed the sky with a
slow and grave motion, and went north. Out of the front of the pillar, a fervent red flame
burst forth with great beams of light. Its speed increased, and it flew thro' the air...Many
beholders saw it in collision, and there came blows as of a fearful combat, and sounds of
crashes were heard at a distance." We note that an object moving with a "slow and grave
motion" could have been neither a comet nor a meteor.

Source: Flores Historiarum attributed to Robert of Reading, Rerum Brittannicarum Medii
Aevi Scriptores 95, v. 3: 210-211.

About 1347, Florence, Italy: Low-flying cigar-shaped
objects at the time of the Black Plague
Writer Gianfranco degli Esposti mentions that "reports relating to the period of the famous
Black Plague, between 1347 and the 1350, speak of strange cigar-shaped objects slowly
crossing the sky, sometimes at low altitude, dispersing in their passage a disturbing mist."
He attributes the Black Plague to these objects because "immediately after the
appearance of these shocking events, the epidemic exploded in that area."
In Florence a huge mass of vapors appeared in the sky, coming from the north. It
spread throughout the land. In the East in the same year, many animals fell from the sky.
Their decomposing animal carcasses were said to make the air fetid and to cause the
spread of the infamous illness that was fatal in India, Asia, and Britain. In Florence alone
it killed 60,000 people.
92

Source: Gianfranco Degli Esposti, "Travi di fuoco e segni divini: paura nei cieli del
Medioevo" (www.edicolaweb.net/ufostl6r.htm); Lycosthenes, Prodigiorum ac
ostentorum Chronicon (Basel, 1557).

20 July 1349, Japan, exact location unknown
Two shining objects clash
Two shining objects appeared from the southeast and northwest. They had a terrible clash
as they appeared to maneuver acrobatically, emitting flashes.

Source: Morihiro Saito, Nihon-Tenmonshiriyou. Chapter 8, "The Messenger from Space."

5 Feb. 1355, Suzhou (Pingjiang) Jiangsu prov., China
Enigma
Big noise in the sky, vision of a large black cloud with flames and lights, loaded with
troops. Physical destruction.
Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 30, citing writer Tao Zhongyi.

Summer 1360, England and France
Armies and towers in the sky

128.

"And in the summertime of this year in flat and deserted places in England and France,
and often visible to many, there suddenly appeared two towers, from which two armies
went out, one of which was crowned with a warlike sign, and the other was clothed in
black. And a second time the warriors overcame the blacks, and returned to their tower,
and the whole vanished."

Source: The Chronicon Angliae, covering 1328 to 1388, is attributed to Thomas
Walsingham (d. 1422). C. E. Britton, Meteorological Chronology to A.D. 1450 (London:
H.M.S.O., 1937), 144.

1361, Yamaguti prefecture, Western Japan
Drum-like object emerges from the sea CD
A drum-shaped object, six meters in diameter, is said to have emerged from the sea. It
flew overhead, going west. We have not traced an exact reference to this case but its
abundant use in databases and on websites has influenced our decision to include it here.

Circa February 1382, Paris, France
Roaming, flashing globe
Before the Maillets uprising, a fiery flashing globe was seen for a period of eight days,
"roaming from door to door above the city of Paris, without there being any wind agitation
nor lightning or noise of thunder, and on the contrary, the weather never ceased to be
serene."
93

Source: Chronique du Religieux Saint Denys contenant le regne de Charles VI de 1380 a
1422. Tome II (Paris, 1840).

1384, Caravaca, Spain
Two lights watch over holy relics
Strange aerial lights were frequently associated with miracles in Medieval Spain. In 1384,
while the Caravaca cross (see case 109 above) was being transported from the village of
Caravaca in Murcia to the village of Lorca y Totan, two lights in the sky accompanied the
cross-bearers throughout the journey. They did not disappear until the object was in place.
There are several stories about the Caravaca cross, which had more than its fair share of
magical adventures. There are legends about how it 'teleported' from one place to another
and how it attracted luminous phenomena on more than one occasion.
Source: Clara Tahoces, "Caravaca, jQue Cruz!" Mas Alia 127 (September 1999).

15 July 1385, London and Dover, England
Three lights join as one
On July 15th 1385 "at London and likewise at Dover, there appeared after sunset a kind of
fire in the shape of a head in the south part of the heavens, stretching out to the northern
quarter, which flew away, dividing itself into three parts, and travelled in the air like a bird
of the woods in flight. At length they joined as one and suddenly disappeared."

Source: C.E. Britton, A Meteorological Chronology to A.D. 1450 (London: H.M.S.O.,
1937), 149; also noted by John Malvern, a monk of Worcester, who certainly contributed
to the Polychronicon (begun by Ranulph Higden, a monk of Chester), but continued the
chronicle only as far as 1377.

14 October 1387, Leicester and Derbyshire, England
Revolving wheel in the sky
"A certain appearance in the likeness of a fire was seen in many parts of the kingdom of
England, now in one form, now in another, nearly on a single night, yet in various places,
throughout the months of November and December (...) and some appeared in the form Of
a burning revolving wheel, others again in the form of a round barrel of flame emitting
fire from above, yet others in the shape of a long fiery beam, and it thus appeared in one
form or another through a great deal of the winter, especially in the counties of Leicester
and Northants."
Source: "Chronicon Henrici Knighton, vel Cnitthon, monachi Leycestrensis," or the
Chronicon of Henry Knighton (d. 1396). The book covers 1337-1396, and after
Knighton's death was continued by another scribe. See also C.E. Britton, A
Meteorological Chronology to A.D. 1450 {London: H.M.S.O., 1937), 150. Note that the
date might be November.

1390, Bologna, Italy
Unknown creatures flying aboard a fiery object
"One tradition states that in 1390 the guardian of the Asinelli Tower saw a "ball of fire"
that rotated over of the roofs, and inside were seen the faces of some devils who were
trying to see outside."
Source: "Quegli Ufo sopra le Due torri," IlDomani di Bologna, 21 October 2006, 10.

26 January 1390, Messina, Sicily, Italy
Light descending, ascending
Mongitore writes "A similar appearance was seen at two hours of the night in Messina, as
you saw fall from the sky above the Cross, at the top of the dome of the Monastery of the
Fathers of St. Salvadore. The monks were astonished at this view, but it was not certain
how long the light was seen, so the fear was brief; as having lasted half an hour, (then it)
went back up to Heaven..."
We retain this case because a "light" visible for half an hour going up in the sky is
unlikely to be a meteor.

Source: Antonino Mongitore, Delia Sicilia ricercata nelle cose piii memorabilia (Palermo,
1742).

Winter 1394, England: Another wheel-shaped object
According to Raphael Holinshed's landmark chronicle of British history, a wheel- or
barrel-shaped object appeared in several areas of England:
"A certain thing appeared in the likeness of fire in many parts of England every night.

This fiery apparition, oftentimes when anybody went alone, it would go with him, and
would stand still when he stood still... To some it appeared in the likeness of a turning
wheel burning; to others as round in the likeness of a barrel, flashing out flames of fire at
the head; to others in the likeness of a long burning lance. "
95

Whatever it was that caused such an impression on the people of England, it does not
seem meteoritic in nature.

Source: Raphael Holinshed, Chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland (London: J.

Johnson, 1808) vol. II, 829. Raphael Holinshed, though not the book's sole author, is
thought to have helped inspire William Shakespeare to write at least two of his plays. Both
Macbeth and King Lear were based on material contained in Holinshed's book.

2 September 1394, Forli, Italy: Huge celestial object
At the second hour of the night, men walking in the main square of Forli saw an enormous
"asub" (celestial object) fly over very slowly. Duration: "the time of two Paternosters." It
left a smell like burning wood. Some witnesses described it as motionless in the sky for a
while.

Source: F. Guarini, I Terremotia Forli (Croppi, Forli, 1880), 142.

1395, Languedoc, France: Aerial combat
"In the land of Languedoc, a big star and five small ones were seen in the sky. These, as it

seemed, attacked and sought to fight the big one, which they followed for half an hour.
Also a voice was heard in the sky, shouting. Then a man was seen, who seemed to be
made of copper, holding a spear in his hand, and throwing fire. He grabbed the big star
and hit it; after which, nothing more was seen."

Source: L 'Histoire de Charles VI, Roy de France, et des choses memorables advenues
durant quarante-deux annees de son regne, depuis 1380jusqu 'a 1422, by Jean Juvenal

des Ursins, eveque de Reims. Published by Michaud and Poujoulat in Nouvelle Collection

des Memolres pour servlr a 1'histoire de France depuis le XIHe siecle jusqu 'a la fin du

XVIIIe, Tome II (1836).

16 September 1408, Rome, Italy: Flying formation

Three "stars" were seen to fly over Rome. The incident was described by Antonio Di
Pietro, canon of the Vatican, in his Diarium Romanum (Diary of Rome from 1404 to
1417), now conserved in the Vatican Archive. Di Pietro narrates that on that evening he
was going to supper with friends near where the ancient Basilica of Saint Peter stands
today.
"Suddenly after sunset...we saw...a beautiful star that, coming from the sky of
Tarrione, headed towards Castel Sant' Angel with two other small, splendid bright stars.
And we were all very surprised by that spectacle."
The sighting may have been of an unusual meteor train.
Sources: Antonio di Pietro, Diarium Romanum (Diary of Rome from 1404 to 1417),
preserved at the Archivio Capitolare Vaticano. This Latin manuscript was found in the
Library of Modena by L. A. Muratori, who inserted the text in Volume XXIV (ed. 1734)

of the Rerum Italicarum Scriptores. See also Coelum astronomy magazine, No. 5-6, Ma>

June 1977, article "Gleanings from science fiction medieval texts" by Umberto
Dall'dmo, 107. Credit: Umberto Cordier.

2 July 1420, Castle Godego, Treviso, Italy
The lady in the light
In the evening a Hungarian merchant, Peter Tagliamento, was leading his herd of cattle to
Bassano del Grappa. As he came to an area of thick brush, close to Castel di Godego, he
realized he had lost the way. All around him were only shadows, the woods, and deep
silence. In despair, Peter started praying and suddenly he saw a great light. Still trying to

realize where he was and what was happening, Peter saw a young woman of great beauty,
who told him how to get to the road towards Bassano, but requested that a chapel be built
at that place. She planted a cross in the earth as proof of her visit.
Peter found his herd and reached the leaders of the community of Godego to fulfill
the mandate he had received. At first no one believed him, but they found the cross
planted in the woods. This convinced them and they decided to erect a chapel, where
people came in solemn processions.
Source: Marino Gamba, Apparizioni mariane nel corso di due millenni (Udine: Ediz. II
Segno, 1999).

3 March 1428, Forli, Italy: Celestial object
Another case of a celestial object ("asub") in Forli: At 1:30 A.M. a fiery lamp was
observed for about two hours. The city archives also mention "a very high flame in the
shape of a tower, and a column of apparent fire rising in the air."
Source: Filippo Guarini, I Terremoti a Forli (Croppi, Forli, 1880), 12-13 and 143.

5 January 1433, Nice, France: Luminous globe

A luminous globe appears, seen several hours. "On January 5th, 1433," writes Abbe
Joseph Bonifacy, "a luminous globe appeared in the air for several hours."

Source: G. Tarade, Soucoupes volantes et civilisations d'outre-espace (Paris: J'Ai L
1969). Also Cielo e Terra, April 1972, 9. We have been unable to verify the text by
Bonifacy, which is only available in manuscript form.

June 1444, Bibbiena, Arezzo, Italy
Unexplained golden globes of light
Over three months multiple witnesses saw globes of light, golden in color, both inside and
outside a church. The story by Don Massimo, a Benedictine monk, mentions that "turning
to the church he and his companions saw a globe as thick as a printing press."
Mr. Lorenzo Piovano of Bibbiena stated that he saw more lights day and night,
moving around the church and leaving a smell of remarkable sweetness. Don Massimo is
careful to add that the mayor and others who ran into the church saw nothing, but they did
notice the smell.
Sources: Don Massimo's manuscript of "Miraculous facts that occurred near Bibbiena,
etc." inserted in the Moreno Frullani Collection No. 29, 56, in the Riccardiana library in
Florence. Also see: http://www.mariadinazareth.it/apparizione%20bibbiena.htm

29 May 1453, Constantinople: Light from the sky
"Every night [during the siege by the Turks] a fire descended from the sky, stood over the
City, and enveloped her with light all night long. At first the Christians read this light as a
sign of God's wrath and the coming destruction of the city, but initial success against the
Turks led to the reinterpretation that God had sided with the Christians and that they
would prevail.
"Thus the sultan and his entire retinue became visibly depressed...and were
considering lifting the siege...On the night before their scheduled departure the heavenly
sign descended in its customary manner but did not envelop our City as it had before...[N]
ow it seemed to be far away, then scattered quickly, and vanished at once. The sultan and
his court were immediately filled with joy."
98

Source: Makarios Melissinos, "Chronicle of the Siege of Constantinople" in George
Phrantzes, Fall of the Byzantine Empire (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts
Press, 1980), 97-136.

Late December 1456, Piacenza, Italy
Four unknowns
In the Annali Piacentini of Antonio da Ripalta, we read of the apparition "of four
wonderful stars that proceeded directly from the east to the west and were positioned
almost in the sign of a cross."

Source: U. Dall'Olmo, "Meteors, meteor showers and meteorites in the Middle Ages,"

Journal for the History of Astronomy 9, 1978.

146.
7 March 1458, Kyoto, Japan: Five stars circle the moon
Five "stars" appeared to circle the moon, changed colors three times and vanished
suddenly.

Source: The Taiheiki: A Chronicle of Medieval Japan, trans. Helen Craig McCullough
(North Clarendon, VT: Tuttle Publishing, 2004).

147.
October 1461, Metz, France: Many lights, seen twice
"Between Saint Remy's day (October 1st ) and All Saints' Day (November 1st ) numerous
and marvelous signs like great firebrands the length of four fathoms and a foot large were
seen in the air. "It lasted for half of a half quarter of an hour and was seen twice. Some
people also said they had seen by night the like of a battle, and heard a great uproar and
noise."
Two significant meteor showers happen in October: the Draconids (between the 8
and 10 day of the month) and the Orionids (around the 21 ). The sightings might have
th

th

st

been caused by these events, but meteors would not account for the report of "great uproar
and noise."

1 November 1461, Arras, France: Hovering object

99

Jacques Duclercq, legal adviser to Philippe III, writes: "On this day of Our Lord, All
Saints Day, there appeared in the sky an object as bright as burning steel, as long and wide

as half of the moon. It was stationary for fifteen minutes. Suddenly, the strange object
began to spiral upwards and then it spun around and rolled over like a loose watch
spring, after which it disappeared in the sky. "

Source: Memoires de Jacques du Clercq, sur le Regne de Philippe le Bon, Due de J
Bourgogne, publies pour la premiere fois par le Baron de Reiffenberg, Tome III (2 ed.,
Bruxelles, 1836), 189.

19 February 1465, Italy: Great ship in the air

From the Notabilia Temporum of Angelo de Tummulillis: "There appeared many signs in
the air in the same month, always in the morning, at daybreak. At the first hour of the 19th
of this month a kind of great flaming ship appeared in the air towards the north and it
appeared again on the 20 and 21 , not at the same time but later."
th

st

Source: U. Dall'Olmo, op. cit.

8 March 1468, Mount Kasuga, Japan: Dark object CD
In the middle of the night a dark object took off from Mount Kasuga flying west towards
the bay of Osaka, with a sound like a spinning wheel. Its size was estimated as 9 by 6 feet.
Source: Brothers Magazine I, 1, no full quotation found.

27 September 1477, Japan, location unknown
Object, unknown substance CD

A luminous object crossed the sky. A cotton-like substance fell for the next six hours.
Source: Case summary in Brothers I, 1, but no original source given.

1478, Milan, Italy: Two flying objects during a war CD
Two unexplained flying objects are observed during a battle.

Fig. 8: Illustration from Lycosthenes
An engraving of the scene accompanies the text in Lycosthenes' edition but there is no
guarantee it was made especially for the book because images such as these were recycled
from publication to publication.
Source: Lycosthenes, Prodigiorum ac ostentorum Chronicon (Basel, 1557).

1479, Arabia: Pointed object in the sky

A remarkable engraving highlights this observation. Lycosthenes notes that this object,
which he calls a "comet," was seen in Arabia, "in the manner of a sharply pointed beam."
The illustration shows that whatever was observed does not to conform to our knowledge
of comets.
However we should note that the illustration looks similar to drawings of the first
multi-stage rockets built around the same time by Conrad Haas. We therefore doubt it was
drawn in Arabia. Usually such drawings would have been provided by the printers, often
taken from very different contexts.
100

Fig. 9: Arabian "rocket"

18 October 1482, Albisola, Savona Province, Italy A dazzling object stops a battle

The facts date back to when the inhabitants of two neighboring villages, Albisola and
Stella, decided to fight over territorial issues. A bloody attack took place. The sky was
totally clear of clouds, when, an hour after midday, a small white cloud came from the
east, so bright it seemed to collect all the rays of the sun. Dazzled by the light, the fighters
heard a sweet clear voice repeating three times the word "peace," and then everything
disappeared. All were astonished, their eyes looking up at the sky, and they abandoned
their weapons.
Sources: Giovanni Bernardo Poggi in the manuscript of his Memoirs. Details can be found
in the magazine Maria Ausiliatrice, September 2005, and at this webpage:
http://www.mariadinazareth.it/Prodigi%201uminosi/Madonna%20della%20Pace.htm

August 1487, Forli, Italy: Floating cartwheel in the sky
"In that same year, on a morning (two hours before day) a big star seemingly appeared,

coming from the mountain and going toward Ravenna. It looked quite like a butterfly

flying in the air. I saw it and so did a lot of peasants who had put either wood or wheat
onto their carts, and also those coming to Forli. I was in the country and had risen to come
to Forli in the cool hours. It lasted a very short time. Some people say they had seen it
when on the mountain, half an hour before." Others saw it as a huge 'cartwheel' floating
in the sky.

Source: Leone Cobelli, an Italian historian, in Cronache Forlivesi dalla Fondazione delttf
Citta all'anno 1498 (Bologna, 1874).
156. *
1491, Vladimir, Russia: A Figure rises in the air
The apparition in the air of the Saint Grand Prince Alexander Nevsky. "In the year 6999
(of the old Russian calendar) in the great city of Vladimir there was an awe-inspiring
apparition and frightful and terrible sign of the wrath of the Lord. Thus the Lord punishes
us and leads us from sin toward repentance.
"On a certain day after morning Mass many saw the following appearance above the
stone church of Our Lady and the residence of the abbot: just above the place where the
remnants of the Saint prince Alexander repose, on the very dome of that church, they saw
a strange sign.

"It was as if a light cloud or thin smoke spread around, white as a pure frost and
bright as the sun. Then the people saw the likeness of the Holy Prince on a white horse
rising up toward the sky. The people who saw it were very frightened and began to toll the
bells all over the city."
Source: A. N. Vyssotsky, "Astronomical Records in the Russian Chronicles from 1000 to

1600 A.D." Historical Notes and Papers 22, Meddelande Fran Lunds Astronomiska

Observatorium, Ser. II., 126, (Sweden, 1949), 45.

13 August 1491, Milan, Italy: Summoning the Aliens
Seven "men" appeared before Philosopher Facius Cardan (Fazio Cardano) in his study.
According to his son Jerome the story left by his father, a mathematically-gifted lawyer
and friend of Leonardo da Vinci, read as follows:
"When I had completed the customary rites, at about the 20th hour of the day, seven
men duly appeared to me clothed in silken garments resembling Greek togas, and wearing,
as it were, shining shoes. The undergarments beneath their glistening and ruddy
breastplates seemed to be wrought of crimson and were of extraordinary glory and beauty.
Nevertheless all were not dressed in this fashion, but only two who seemed of nobler rank
than the others. The taller of them who was of ruddy complexion was attended by two
companions, and the second, who was fairer and of shorter stature, by three. Thus in all
there were seven. They were about forty years of age, but they did not appear to be aboV$
thirty. When asked who they were, they said they were men composed, as it were, of air,
and subject to birth and death. It was true that their lives were much longer than ours, and
might even reach to three hundred years' duration. Questioned on the immortality of our
soul, they affirmed that nothing survived which is peculiar to the individual...
"When my father asked them if they did not reveal treasures to men if they knew
where they were, they answered that it was forbidden by a peculiar law under the heaviest
penalties for anyone to communicate this knowledge to men. They remained with my
father for over three hours. But when he questioned them as to the cause of the universe
they were not agreed. The tallest of them denied that God had made the world from
eternity. On the contrary, the other added that God created it from moment to moment, so
that should He desist for an instant the world would perish."
2

Fig. 10: Jerome Cardan (Girolamo Cardano, 1501-1576)
Source: Jerome Cardan, De Subtilitate Rerum Libri XXI (Nuremberg, in-folio 1550), XIX.

11 October 1492, Guanahany, Bahamas
The light seen by Columbus
Two hours before midnight Christopher Columbus and a crew member saw a light
alternately going higher and lower. The actual passage reads as follows:
"The land was first seen by a sailor called Rodrigo de Triana, although the Admiral at
ten o'clock that evening standing on the quarter-deck saw a light, but so small a body that
he could not affirm it to be land; calling to Pero Gutierrez, broom of the King's wardrobe,
he told him he saw a light, and bid him look that way, which he did and saw it; he did the
same to Rodrigo Sanchez of Segovia, whom the King and Queen had sent with the
squadron as comptroller, but he was unable to see it from his situation.
"The Admiral again perceived it once or twice, appearing like the light of a wax
candle moving up and down, which some thought an indication of land. But the Admiral

held it for certain that land was near; for which reason, after they had said the Salve which
the seamen are accustomed to repeat and chant after their fashion, the Admiral directed
them to keep a strict watch upon the forecastle and look out diligently for land, and to him
who should first discover it he promised a silken jacket, besides the reward which the
King and Queen had offered, which was an annuity of ten thousand maravedis."
103

Source: Personal Narrative of the First Voyage of Columbus to America: From a
Manuscript Recently Discovered in Spain, trans. Samuel Kettell (Boston: T. B. Wait and
Son, 1827), 32-33. "

1494, Apulia, Italy: Three suns at night
"Upon the coming of the little King Charles the VHIth in Naples...in Apulia during the
night three suns appeared in the middle of the sky which was all around covered with
clouds, accompanied by many lightnings and horrible thunders."
Source: Francesco Guicciardini, Storia d'ltalia (Turin: Giulio Einaudi, 1971).

20 September 1498, Japan, location unknown
Umbrella-shaped object

A bright object resembling an umbrella crossed the sky with a rumbling sound.
Source: Brothers 1,1, Dainihonjisinsiriyo Nihon-jisinsiriyo; Takao Ikeda, UFOs over

Japan.

1499, South Atlantic, off Africa
The slow-moving light seen by Pedro Cabral
A phenomenon difficult to explain as a meteor occurred when Pedro Alvares Cabral left
Portugal on an expedition of 13 vessels and a crew of 1,200 men. The expedition was
plagued with incidents. However, had it not been for one such near-disaster they would
never have headed west and gone down in history as the first men to reach Brazil in the
year 1500. As they were sailing around Africa they saw a luminous object in the southern
sky. It only remained in sight for 8 minutes, moving slowly towards the Cape of Good
Hope. Shortly after, a hurricane arose. Six ships sank or ran aground. The remaining seven
went on to the Americas. These vessels made it back to Lisbon bringing with them a
fortune in spices and news about the discovery of Brazil and Madagascar.

Source: W. B. Greenlee, ed., The Voyage of Pedro Alvares Cabral to Brazil and India
(London: Hakluyt Society, 1937).

Epilogue to Part I-B

104

By the close of the 15 century the use of printing had changed everything in terms of the
generation and distribution of knowledge. German inventor Johann Gutenberg
(1397-1468), who may have been aware of earlier Chinese and Korean printing methods,
had developed molds that allowed for the mass production of individual pieces of metal
type. Printing presses soon began to appear all over Europe.
Books were scarce, copied by monks or (after the 13th century) in commercial
scriptoria, written by hand. While it might take someone a year or more to hand copy a
Bible, with the Gutenberg press it was possible to create several hundred copies a year.
Printed works were not immediately popular: some nobles refused to keep printed books
in their libraries, fearing that would depreciate their valuable manuscripts. Much of the
Islamic world, where calligraphic traditions were extremely important, also resisted. In
spite of this, Gutenberg's printing press spread rapidly. Within thirty years of its invention
in 1453, towns across Europe had the equipment.
For the purposes of our study, it is important to note that printing, which made an
impact only comparable in modern times to that of the Internet, led to information
spreading more quickly, within a more literate citizenry, so that more reports of unusual
events survived. On the negative side, it also spread disinformation and misinformation,
just as the Internet does today. Publishers shamelessly exploited people's fears by
trumpeting strange events, while stories of portents and signs in the sky were cynically
invented to support political or religious objectives.
th

105

Printing was expensive. It became a source of significant profits, two facts that
combined to spread sensational news broadsheets of dubious validity, creating incentives
to compile information about unusual incidents. Chroniclers correlated such visions with
current affairs and future predictions. As we study the records of unusual sightings in the
sixteenth century and beyond, increasingly sharp analysis is required to take these social
distortion effects into consideration.
Another important factor appears in the late fifteenth century with European scholars'
novel obsession with witchcraft, putting the topic of unusual phenomena (and ordinary
folks' interaction with them) in a new and dangerous light. The most authoritative and
influential treatise on the subject of witchcraft was indisputably the Malleus Maleficarum,
or "The Witch's Hammer," written in 1486 by two erudite Dominican friars. It served as
the official witch-hunter's handbook for nearly two centuries, the maximum authority
used by inquisitors, magistrates and priests to justify the brutal torture and execution of
alleged witches in every European country. The text was reprinted at least sixteen times in
German, eleven times in French, twice in Italian and went through more than half a dozen
editions in English. It became the principal source of inspiration for every work published
after it.
The authors of the Malleus Maleficarum, Jacob Sprenger (1436-95), Dean of the
Theology Faculty at the University of Cologne, and the prior Heinrich Kramer
(1430-1505), divided their treatise into three parts. The first part discussed the need for
governing authorities to comprehend the true diabolical nature of witchcraft in all its
aspects: the threat posed to Catholicism, pacts with the Devil, problems caused by
lascivious demons, and so on. The second part deals with the three kinds of maleficia
(dark magic) and how they may be "successfully annulled and dissolved." The third part
considers methods to hold a witchcraft trial and the punishment that best suits each crime.
Here we can find advice on what punishment should be given "in the Case of one Accused
upon a Light Suspicion" and about "the Method of passing Sentence upon one who has
been Accused by another Witch, who has been or is to be Burned at the Stake."
106

Of particular interest to us is the issue of physical contact with beings assumed to be
demons, a form of interaction the two scholars call "transvection". Of all the issues dealt
with in the Malleus Maleficarum, the most prominent were (1) whether humans could
feasibly procreate with demons and bear their children, and (2) whether people were taken
physically by demonic beings and transported to secret locations, or if it was all in the
mind.
In other words, five hundred years ago they were debating the exact same issues as
ufologists today. It may seem a horrid, unfair thought, but it is difficult to read ancient
books such as the Malleus Maleficarum or Remy's later De Demonolatriae (1595) without
coming away with the impression that today's leading abduction researchers, who abuse
witnesses with dubious hypnotic techniques to extract information, would have enjoyed a
successful collaboration with the chief inquisitors of yore.

PART I-C
Sixteenth-Century Chronology
The sixteenth century is marked, first and foremost, by extraordinary expansion of the
knowledge of the world, thanks to numerous expeditions to the Americas. In 1519
Magellan leaves for the first voyage around the world; he sails into the Pacific Ocean,
previously unknown to Europeans. As a result, the commercial prominence of
Mediterranean cities decreases, to the advantage of ports like Lisbon and the premier
colonial empires, Portugal and Spain. In Mexico and Peru, explorers find thriving
civilizations and many opportunities for enrichment that help transform European society.
Parallel to the expansion of geographic knowledge, navigation, and trade, the world
undergoes a deep transformation of ideas under the influence of the humanist philosophy
that feeds the Renaissance, blending with mystical notions that refuse to disappear, while
early scientists like Copernicus (1473-1543) and Galileo (1564-1642) use critical
observation and the experimental method to build new theories of the world that conflict
with traditional teachings.
It is the time of Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Raphael in art, and of Martin
Luther in religion. In 1520 the Reformation shakes the foundations of the Catholic church,
which reacts with renewed commitment to its mystical basis: When Ignatius of Loyola
founds the Jesuit Order in 1534, first as a tool against the Moslem religion, and eventually

against Protestantism, he is said to have been threatened by an assassin, who fled when an
angel came down from the sky and confronted him!

Fig. 11: Ignatius of Loyola saved by an angel
Thus reports of unusual phenomena gradually become caught between increasing rational
interest in all natural effects and lingering temptation to attribute them to celestial powers,
in the phraseology of traditional religion- a polarity that has survived to the present day.

1501, between Urbino and Gubbio, central Italy
Abortions caused by a horrible object in the sky
Professor Carlo Pedretti, specialist of Leonardo da Vinci Studies at the University of
California, has published an article about relations between the "monstrous" and the
Renaissance. He stated that the Florentine physician Antonio Benivieni (1443-1502), who
was interested in monsters from the pathological point of view, mentions a wonder that
took place between Urbino and Gubbio in 1501: "a horrible appearance in the stormy sky
that caused many abortions - what we today call the appearance of a UFO."
108

Source: Antonio Benivieni, De abditis nonnullis ac mirandis morborum et sanationem

causis, G. Weber, ed., in Academia Toscana di Scienze e Lettere "La Columbaria, " 142
(Florence: Leo S. Olschki, 1994), 190; Carlo Pedretti, La Nazione, 28 July 1979.

29 September 1504, Tirano, Val Poschiavo, Italy
Abducted by a lady of light
At dawn a man named Mario Omodei, who had gone into his garden, was suddenly
surrounded by a dazzling light and heard a voice that called him by name. At the same

time he felt lifted from the ground and found himself carried away to a land owned by a
man named Alojsio Quadrio. Here, in an even more dazzling vision, an apparition he took
to be Mary instructed him to make public the fact that she wanted a temple dedicated to
her. Indeed it was completed in 1513 and consecrated in 1528.
A priest named Simone Cabasso wrote in 1601 about the adventure of Omodei: "it
seemed that the mountains (...) were illuminated by an unusual light (...) He clearly felt
lifted from the earth, and transported to a garden, and was taken down to the ground." The
luminous apparition looked like a 14-year old girl.
Sources: Gamba, Marino. Apparizioni mariane nel corso di due millenni. Udine: Ediz. II
Segno (1999); and Cabasso, Simone, Miracoli della Madonna di Tirano. Vicenza: Ed.
Pietro Gioannini (1601).

19 March 1509, Villefranche-du-Rouergue Vehicle interference: Light beings free up
a chariot
A man named Collongis (or Collonges) who was driving a cart across a fork in a shallow
river tried in vain to free it when it became stuck. Having prayed fervently, he saw a being
in a blinding light coming from the East, accompanied by twelve other figures. He took
them to be the Virgin Mary and the Apostles. They stepped on thirteen stones local people
used to cross the river and disappeared in the West. As they vanished, Collongis found
that his cart was free from the mud. An investigation by the bishop of Rodez led to the
founding of the Chapel of the Thirteen Stones on July 1 , 1510.
109

r t

Sources: Bernard, Gilles and Guy Cavagnac, Villefranche-du-Rouergue, histoire etgenie
du lieu, Ed. Privat (1991), 82, and Chiron, Yves. Enquete sur les Apparitions de la Vierge.
Paris: Ed. Perrin (1955), 65-66. (Credit: Franck Marie)

1513, Rome, Italy: Michelangelo's flying triangle
The celebrated sculptor Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475-1564) observed a triangular light
with three tails of different colors. He painted a picture of it but this has not survived.
According to Benedictine chronicler Benedetto Lushino's book Vulnera Diligentis
(second book, chapter XXII) Michelangelo saw a "triangular sign" one calm night.

Fig. 12: Michelangelo

It resembled a star with three tails, one silvery, the second one red, and the third fiery and
bifurcated.

Source: Giovanni Papini, La vita di Michelangiolo nella vita delsuo tiempo (Milano:
Garzanti, 1949), 198-200.

8 November 1517, Moldavia, Romania
An object resembling a face
According to the 17 century Moldavian chronicler, Grigore Ureche (ca. 1590-1617), "a
great blue sign shining like the face of a man" appeared in the sky. After some time
without moving, it "hid itself in the sky again."
th

Source: Grigore Ureche, Letopisetul Tarii Moldovei. As published by E. Picot, Chronique
de Moldavie depuis le milieu du XlVe Siecle jusqu 'a l'an 1594 (Paris: E. Leroux, 1878).

April 1518, Yucatan, Mexico: A "star" with rays of light
Spanish conquistador Juan de Grijalva (ca. 1489-1527) wrote: "On this day, in the evening,
we witnessed a big miracle, and it was that there appeared a star above the ship after
sunset, and it moved away, emitting rays of light continuously until it was above the town

or large village, and it left a trace in the air that lasted for three long hours, and we also
saw other very clear signs, by which we understood that God wanted us to populate that
land..." The village was Coatzalcoalco.

110

Source: "Itinerario de la armada del rey catolico a la isla de Yucatan, en la India, el ano
1518, en la que fue por Comandante y Capitan General Juan de Grijalva. Escrito para su
Alteza por el Capitan mayor de la dicha armada." In Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta,

Collection de documentos para la historia de Mexico, Volume 1. Mexico (Libraria de J.

M. Andrade, Portal de Agustinos N. 3, 1858), 302.

1520, Hereford, England: Fiery circle flies up
A case with thermal effects was recorded by Lycosthenes in his Prodigiorum ac

Ostentorum Chronicon:

"In 1520 AD in England, at Hereford, a colossal beam of fire was seen in the sky.
Approaching the earth, it burned many things with its heat. After this, it ascended into the
sky again and was seen to change its shape into a circle of fire."
Source: Lycosthenes, op. cit., 527.

1521, Cuenca, Spain: Contact with a flying Alien

Dr. Eugenio Torralba was in contact with "Zekiel," a being who taught him many secrets,
and flew him to Rome. Torralba received such fame by virtue of his new-found
knowledge and medicines that even Cervantes mentioned him in Don Quijote:
"Remember the true story of Dr. Torralba," says Quijote, "who was taken by the devils
through the air...and in twelve hours arrived in Rome..." In 1525 he became the personal
doctor of the widowed queen of Portugal, Leonor.
Zekiel (or "Zequiel"), however, proved to be Torralba's curse as well as a blessing.
The Inquisition didn't take long to find out about the good doctor's dealings with the
entity, and it was soon revealed that Torralba had been physically transported to faraway
places by magical means. Torralba was arrested in 1528 and cruelly tortured, despite his
insistence that he had never entered into a pact with the creature nor gone against the
Catholic faith at any time. He was sentenced to prison on March 6th 1531, but was soon
released and allowed to continue his medical practices on the condition that he never agAlh
had any contact with Zekiel.
Source: Marcelino Menendez y Pelayo, Historic de Jos Heterodoxos Espanoles (Madrid:
La Editorial Catolica, 1978).

1523, Changsu, Jiangsu Province, China
Flying ships, carrying men
The Chinese book Stories in a Summerhouse of Flowers, written by Qiu Fuzuo, includes
an account of an encounter that took place in 1523, in the second year of Emperor
Jianjing's reign. At this time there lived a teacher called Lii Yu in the village of Yujiu.

"One day when it was raining without stopping the teacher observed two ships sailing
over the woolly clouds above the ruins, in front of his house. On these two ships that
measured more than ten fathoms [over sixty feet], two tall men were busying themselves,
each one twelve feet tall and wearing a red hat and multicoloured clothes. They held a
pole in their hands. The ships moved very quickly.
"In the home of the teacher Lii Yu that day there happened to be a score of scholars
who, alerted by Lii Yu, came out of the house and stood next to him to observe the
phenomenon. Then, the men in multicolored clothing passed their hand over the scholars'
mouths; their mouths at once became black and as a result none of them could speak. At
that moment, they saw a man, escorted like a mandarin, dressed like an old scholar,
emerge on one of the ships accompanied by a bonze. A long time after this, the ships flew
away, as if carried by the clouds, and descended again a kilometer away, in a cemetery.
The ships set off again; the scholars felt their mouths return to normal. But five days later,
Ju Lu died, though nobody knows why."
Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 42.

1526, Rome, Italy: Demonic transportation
The Italian inquisitor Paulus Grillandus, whose Tractatus de Hereticis et Sortilegiis had
almost as much impact as the Malleus Maleficarum, wrote that a countryman in Rome
saw his wife take all her clothes off and go out of the house.

The next morning he asked his wife where she had been all night. At first she refusal
to tell him, but when he started to become more aggressive she told him she went to a
witch gathering. He demanded that she take him with her the next time, and not long after
this they were both "transported" by two he-goats. However, she warned her husband not
to pronounce the word "God" during his time with the demons, to which he agreed. The
man saw many famous people at the meeting, all of whom declared their devotion to the
Devil in a ceremony. There was a dance and a banquet. The man noticed that the food on
the table lacked salt. Of course, salt has purifying qualities associated with warding off
evil spirits and was therefore shunned by demons and fairies alike. The man was unaware
of this fact, much to his misfortune. He asked for the salt and, when he thought he had it in
his hand, exclaimed, "Thank God, the salt has come!"
Suddenly, everything disappeared before his eyes. Men, women, tables and dishes
evaporated and everything went dark. He found himself naked in the countryside, in the
cold night. At dawn he met some shepherds who informed him he was near Benevento,
some 100 miles from Rome. They gave him something to eat and clothes to wear, and
eventually he found his way home, begging for money on the way. When he reached
Rome, starving and exhausted, the first thing he did was to report his wife, who was
forced to confess and promptly burnt at the stake.
Medieval demonologists, similar to today's abductionists, could be divided into two
broad groups: the skeptics and the "true believers." The sceptics regarded the whole
subject of transvection as a mental illusion that gave a person the sensation of being lifted
bodily by devils and taken through the sky. There was no need or precedent for complex
psychological theories as such illusions were generally attributed to dark Satanic forces. In
fact, it was heretical to think otherwise: "The act of riding abroad may be merely illusory,
since the devil has extraordinary power over the minds of those who have given
themselves up to him, so that what they do in pure imagination, they believe they have
actually and really done in the body."
2

113

Some researchers have speculated on the possibility that some, if not all, abductions
and encounters occur in altered states of consciousness and not in the physical world as
we know it.
Source: Malleus Maleficarum: The Classic Study of Witchcraft, Part I, Question I, 7, trar
Montague Summers (London: Bracken Books, 1996).

1528, Utrecht, Netherland: Yellow object in the sky
"Cruel and strange observation" of a yellow object in the sky, flying over during the siege
of the city. The inhabitants of Utrecht panicked, while attackers took it as a sign of
impending success. Lycosthenes writes: "At the time the city of Utrecht was heavily
besieged, a terrible sign was seen in the sky which threw the town inhabitants into dismay
and the enemies into the hope of capturing the town. For a sign in the sky, resembling a
cross of a yellowish color (and of terrible aspect) appeared over the town. And because it
was the symbol of Burgundy, they believed on both sides that the town would shortly
belong to the Burgundians."

Source: Terribile visione in cielo durante Tassendio di Utrecht (1528), and Lycosthenes,
Prodigiorum ac ostentorum chronicon, 536.

9 October 1528. Westrie, N. Germany: Horrible object
A bizarre sighting was chronicled by Pierre Boaistuau in his Histoires Prodigieuses.
Ambroise Pare describes a blood-red 'comet' that appeared over Westrie. It so terrified the
populace that some reportedly died of panic and others became ill. The 'comet' emerged
from the east and was seen for an hour and a quarter, disappearing finally towards midday
- which implies, by the way, that it could not have been a comet unless by "midday" was
meant "the southern direction."
At the top of the object people described an arm that held a great sword, the blade
pointing downwards. There were three stars towards the tip of the sword, the one right on
the end being the brightest. On both sides of the 'comet' were a great number of axes,
blades and bloody swords and repulsive, bearded human faces.
114

Source: Ambroise Pare and all subsequent authors drew from a booklet by Peter Creutzer:

Auslegung Peter Creutzers, etwan des weytberhiimbten Astrologi M. Jo. Liechtenbegers
(sic) discipels iiber den erschrecklichen Cometen.. .erschynen am xi. Tag Weynmonats des
MCCCCxxvii. Jars... (1527).

Fig. 13: "Horrible object" seen in Westrie
August 1533, Peru: Another mysterious "non-comet"

Garcilaso de la Vega, the Incan, writes in Chapter 23 of his work Historic General del
Peru, that Tupac Huallpa's fear of his own death was exacerbated by the sighting of a
great greenish black 'comet' in August 1533. It was an unusual comet, "a little narrower
than the body of a man and longer than a pike" (spear-headed medieval weapon), and had
been seen by many witnesses on several occasions at night. This made Huallpa
particularly depressed because a similar object had been observed a few days before the
death of his father, Huayna Capac. This comet was evidently not of the ordinary kind, at
least in the opinion of Huallpa, who was accustomed to heavenly phenomena. Besides,
comets are not "greenish-black!"
Tupac Huallpa was executed on 29 August 1533.
Source: Inca Gracilaso de la Vega, Historia General del Peru (1617), Book I, Chapter
XXXIV.

31 May 1536, Monte Stella, Brescia, Lombardy, Italy Apparition, with a message
Antonio de' Antoni, a poor deaf-mute shepherd of Gardone Val Trompia, was reciting the
rosary while his flock was grazing. Suddenly there came before his eyes a light more
intense than the Sun, in the middle of which the Virgin appeared with Jesus in her arms.
Dressed in a simple way, she wanted the shepherds to build a temple there.
Antonio went off and described the event to everyone he knew, and when he returned
the site was "illuminated by the beams of an overhanging star." Pope Paul III gave the
place a consecrated status, and construction was completed in 1539.

Source: Marino Gamba, Apparizioni mariane nel corso di due millenni (Udine: Ediz. II
Segno, 1999).

1537, near Florence, Italy
Benvenuto Cellini's "enormous splendor"
In his autobiography well-known artist Benvenuto Cellini relates the following:

Fig. 14: Benvenuto Cellini
"On horseback, we were coming back from Rome. Suddenly people cried 'Oh God
what is that great thing we see over Florence.' It was a great object of fire, twinkling and
emitting enormous splendor..."

Source: Benvenuto Cellini, Vita, 1558-1566, Book I, 89.

16 January 1538, Franconia, Thiiringen, Germany Disk, melted metal
A large "star" was seen in the sky and came down, emitting balls of fire that melted metal
objects. Scholar Simon Goulart lists the case in his chronicles as follows:
"It was seen in Franconia, between Bamberg and Thuringia Forest, a star of
marvelous magnitude, which came lower gradually, and became a great white circle from
which whirlwinds and clumps of fire emerged. When they fell onto the earth they melted
the tips of spears, irons and horses'bits without hurting either men or buildings."

Source: Simon Goulart, Tresors d'Histoires Admirables et Memorables de notre Temps

(1600). Geneve: P. Marceau (1610), 53-54. Jobus Fincelius, Wunderzeiche, Warhafftige

Beschreybung und grundlich verzeichnuss schrocklicher Wunderzeichen und Geschichten
(Jhena: Rodinger, 1556); Lycosthenes, op. cit., 563.

15 May 1544, Nay, Beam, France: Crashing object
An object shaped like a fiery sword (variously described as "three fireballs") hovered
above the town, then fell and crushed a house with a frightening noise.

Source: Pierre Boaistuau, HistoiresProdigieuses (1560), vol. II, 148.

1546, Caranza near La Spezia, Italy: Disk changes color
A manuscript by the chronicler, Father Antonio Cesena, found in the public library at La
Spezia, tells of farmers reporting "a strange disk, changing from yellow to red, with red
fireballs shining beneath it". It was seen in two separate areas including the small village
of Caranza, near Passo del Bocco "from time to time."
Cesena interpreted the sighting as a portent of the death later that year of Count LuigP
Fieschi, the governor of Varese Ligure.

Source: Antonio Cesena, Relatione dell'origine e sucessi della terra di Varese (1558). The
original manuscript is lost but a copy made in 1683 is still held by the Bibioteca della
Societa Economica di Chiavari (ms. Z VI 29).

24 April 1547, Halberstadt, Saxony, Germany: Black sphere
A black ball-shaped object was seen, apparently "emerging from the middle of the moon"
and flying fast towards the North.

Source: Simon Goulart, Tresors d'Histoires Admirables et Memorables de notre Temps
(1600); Jobus Fincelius, Wunderzeiche, Warhafftige Beschreybung undgrundlich
verzeichnuss schrocklicher Wunderzeichen und Geschichten. (Jhena: Rodinger, 1556);
Lycosthenes, op. cit., 595.

13 November 1547, Near Rome, Italy
Strange objects fly over
A rod and a cross appeared in the sky at 3 P.M., with a bird-like object above them. The
weather was clear and the sky was calm. The objects were seen for three days.
The event is depicted in a German broadsheet in the Johann Jacob Wick's collection,
held by the Zurich Zentralbibliothek.

Source: Jobus Fincelius, Wunderzeiche, Warhafftige Beschreybung und grundlich
verzeichnuss schrocklicher Wunderzeichen und Geschichten (Jhena: Rodinger, 1556);
Erschreckliche unerhorte warhafftige Gesichten sogesehen istzu Rhom... (Strassburg:

Jakob Frolich, 1547), ZB PAS II 12/29.

15 December 1547, Hamburg, Germany
Heat-generating globe
"The sailors of Hamburg saw in the air, at midnight, a glistening globe fiery like the Sun,
rolling towards the northern part. Its rays were so hot that passengers could not remain

inside the ships, but were forced to hide and take cover, thinking that their vessels were
about to burn."

Source: Simon Goulart, Tresors d'Histoires Admirables et Memorables de notre Temps
(1600); Fincelius, Jobus, op. cit.; Lycosthenes, op. cit., 595.

28 June 1548, Oettingen, Bavaria
Flying vehicles, red flames
The sky became darker and about twenty flying "vehicles" were seen coming and going
above the houses, along with red flames. The witness says he saw the phenomenon on W&
occasions: on 28 June and on 26 July 1548.
Source: Bruno Weber, Wunderzeichen und winkeldmcker, 1543-1586, Urs Graf Verlag
(Zurich: Dietikon, 1972), 93.

19 June 1550, near Trebnitz, Saxony, Germany
Bloody rain, split sun
The people of Saxonia, near Wittemberg, beheld a strange sight, according to Boaistuau in
Histoires Prodigieuses. A great cross appeared in the sky, surrounded by two large armies

that made a lot of noise while they fought. Blood fell to the ground like rain and the sun
split in two, one piece of which seemed to drop to the earth.
Boaistuau drew this story from Lycosthenes, who in turn took it from Fincelius.
Lycosthenes made an error in the date and location, but we were fortunate in finding a
contemporary broadsheet from 1550 that depicts and describes the phenomenon just as
Fincelius wrote.

15 October 1550, Biubiu River, Chile
The Lady from the Comet
Pedro de Valdivia (1500-1554), a conquistador who went to America to seek fame and
fortune, fought for Francisco Pizarro in the Battle of Salinas, and later headed the
conquest of Chile in 1540, founding Santiago del Nuevo Extremo (nowadays Santiago)
the following year, Concepcion in 1550 and the city of Valdivia in 1552, before his death
at the hands of the Araucan Indians.
Valdivia left very few written documents, but one of these, an "instruction" addressed
to his representatives at the Court, dated October 15th 1550, mentions two mysterious
figures that appeared to the Mapuche Indians shortly before an attack. The beings, a
beautiful woman and an old man on a horse, both dressed in white, had come to warn the

Indians that they would perish if they tried to retaliate. When the first visitor, the woman,
had disappeared, the devil himself intervened to reiterate the message!
Valdivia made two reports, one of which, the most complete of the two, he sent to th£
king Charles V on the same day. This is what the conquistador wrote:
"And it seems our God wants to use His immortality for his divine cult to be honored
in it and for the devil to come out from where he has been worshipped for so long; thus,
according to the native Indians, the day they came upon this fort of ours, at the same time
as those that rode on horseback assaulted them, there fell in the middle of the squadrons
an old man on a white horse, and he told them:
"'Flee all of you, these Christians will slaughter you,' and their fright was so great
that they began to flee. They [the Indians] told more: that three days before this, [when the
Indians were] passing the Biubiu river to overcome us, a comet fell among them, on
Saturday at midday, which was seen by many Christians at our fort as it traveled with
greater brightness than other comets, and from which, once fallen, a beautiful woman
came out, also dressed in white, who told them: 'Serve the Christians, don't go against
them because they are very brave and will kill you all.'
And when she went, the devil came, their chief, and he told them to gather a large
multitude of people, and that he would come with them, because, on seeing so many of us
together, we would drop dead with fear; and thus they proceeded with their journey."

Circa 1551, Morbecque, France
Sex with the Devil: A flying contactee condemned to die CD
A woman named Jacquemine Deickens, the wife of Hirache, was accused of sorcery after
a being (thought to be the Devil) appeared to her as she was milking the cows.
She was said to have known him carnally, and received a mark on her back, below the
left shoulder blade, which proved her guilt. Every three or four weeks she flew out of her
house to meet with other witches at the crossroads in front of the house of Mr. Pierre
Depours, there to dance and partake of a feast with many demons.
She was tried and executed in 1557.

Source: Claude Seignolle, Les Evangiles du Diable selon la croyance populaire (Paris:
Maisonneuve & Larose, 1964), 245.

119

1551, near Waldstadt, Germany
Woman taken up by the devil and dropped from the sky
A woman who had uttered some blasphemies during a drinking party was taken up in the
air by the devil "in the presence of everyone." The witnesses rushed out to watch where
she was carried. They saw her hovering up in the sky outside the village, after which she
dropped and was found dead in the middle of a field.

Source: Dr. Jean Wier, Histoires, disputes et discours des illusions et impostures des
diables, des magiciens, in fames, sorciers et empoisonneurs, le tout compris en 5 Jivres.

Translated from the Latin, ca. 1577.

3 January 1551, Lisbon, Portugal:
Flying red cylinders
Red cylinders in the sky are rumored to have terrified the population. We note that another
reference speaks of a "fiery meteor" seen on 28 January at the time of a great earthquake.
In the absence of a precise source we cannot say if confusion exists between the two
reports.
Source: H. Wilkins, Flying Saucers on the Attack (New York: Ace Books, 1967), 183. We
have found no original reference for this event.

March 1551, Magdeburg, Germany
A phenomenon scares an Emperor
Three suns were seen in the sky. Emperor Charles Quint decides to halt the siege of the
city. In the absence of more information, these may have been parhelia. Historians report
that "The emperor Charles V laid siege to it; but was prevailed upon to withdraw his army
for a great sum of money..."

Source: Rev. Alban Butler, "Life of Saint Norbert" in The Lives or the Fathers, Martyrs
and Other Principal Saints, vol. 6 (New York: D. & J. Sadlier, & Company, 1864).

13 January 1553, Porco, Peru
An unexplained "comet" is taken as an omen
Nicolas de Martinez Arzanz y Vela, author of Historic de la Villa Imperial de Potosi
(1705), writes in Chapter 2:
"As Don Sebastian and his allies were getting the people and the weapons ready to
carry out the revolt in this Town, and Captain Francisco Hernandez Giron in his divisioil
of Chaqui...was also preparing for his...there appeared in the sky, above Porco, three suns
and two moons in the middle of a great ring, and within it two blue and red arches. On the
same day there appeared above this rich Imperial Hill and Town another two arches of
various colors and a notable comet as red as blood. Enrico Martinez, His Majesty's
Cosmologist in the Peruvian Kingdom, says the following (...)
"'On Friday January 13th 1553, fifty two days before General Hinojosa was killed, at
seven o'clock in the morning there appeared in the sky, in Porco, the large ring that passes
through the middle of the natural sun and through the other Suns and Moons; it was
stretching towards the west, and was entirely white, a span in thickness; this ring seemed
to be half a league in diameter. The natural sun was a little red, almost like blood, and the
two at its side very red, just like blood, so much so that the brightness and fire caused
those who saw it to avert their eyes. The two Moons at the front were like white Moons,
slightly red; the two Arches that appeared were blue and red, as they usually appear; the
small arch was wider than the blue one.'"
20

So far it seems we are dealing with an unusual, but perfectly natural, atmospheric
phenomenon. More interesting is the so-called "comet" that was seen in connection with
it:
"The comet that appeared outside the ring was very fiery and blood-red, with a
formidable curly head and the tail was similar. This comet was seen in Porco and in all the
surrounding areas. The comet was seen for seven days at dawn over the rich land of
Potosi, with another two arches, one very white which looked like polished silver, and the
other was above this one and was almost blood-red and was as bright as fire..."
This description does not match a cometary object, and at 7 A.M. this could hardly
have been an aurora borealis. The social reaction to the phenomenon is even more
interesting: "The astonished Indians, covering their faces and spitting in the air, cried:
Aacca, Aucca, maiccan Apuhuanuncca. These words signified some bad event,
abominable action or frightful ruin, which is all conveyed by the word Aucca, a name they
also give to any visible or invisible enemy (...)
The death of the great Apuc followed that of Francisco Hernandez Giron, who, with
the income from his villages, was to appear like the Sun three times in the bloody victories
he had; and twice like the Moon, in the waning of his fortune with his imprisonment and
death."
The complex phenomena described here could only be accounted for by a
combination of very unusual atmospheric circumstances.
121

1 February 1554, Salon de Provence, France
Sighting report by Nostradamus

Dr. Nostradamus and a thousand other witnesses have seen a big "bright burning rod" that
changed its flight path, between 7 and 8 P.M. It was in the sky for two hours, displaying a
swinging motion. Here is the actual report:
TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS, HIGH-BORN AND ALMIGHTY LORD CLAUDE, DUKE
OF TENDE,
Knight of the order of Regents and of the King and Honorary Citizen of Provence,
Michael de Nostre Dame, his humble and obedient Servant bids greeting and good
fortune.
"Gracious Lord,
"According to reports received, on the first day of February in this year of 1554, a
most terrifying and horrible sight was seen on [....] towards evening, apparently between
7 and 8, which I am told was seen as far as Marseille. Then it was also seen at nearby St.
Chamas by the sea, such that near the moon (which at that time was near its first quarter) a
great fire did come from the east and make its way towards the west. This fire, being very
great, did by all accounts look like a great burning staff or torch, gave out from itself a
wondrous brightness, and flames did spurt from it like a glowing iron being worked by a
smith. And such fire did sparkle greatly, glowing aloft like silver over an immense
distance like Jacob's road in the sky, known as the 'Galaxy' [i.e., the Milky Way], and
raced overhead very fast like an arrow with a great roaring and crackling thunderous din'
and as though it were being blown hither and thither by the [raging and roaring?] of a
mighty wind.
"Then slowly, over the course of 20 minutes, it turned until we saw it passing over the
region of Aries via that we call the 'stony road' which the poets do call immensum

fragorem [i.e. the Crau]. Then it turned towards the south, high over the sea, and the fiery
stream that it created retained its fiery color for a long time, and cast fiery sparks all
around it, like rain falling from heaven.
"This sight was much more terrifying than human tongue could say or describe. And I
thought that it might have come from a mountain known as a volcano. But on the 14th of
this month I was called to [Bry?], where I asked diligently of many people whether they
also had seen it, but not all of them had experienced it. But it did appear only seven miles
from there, and the Lord of that same place had seen it, and desired that I should be his
witness that he had seen and wished to record it. Two days after the fire had been seen, the
Prefect of St. Chamas came to me and indicated that he and other townspeople had seen
the same thing, and that it had taken the shape of a half-rainbow stretching as far as the
Spanish Main. And if it had been low down rather than high up, it would have burnt up
everything and reduced it to ashes as it went by.

Fig. 15: Object seen in Salon de Provence
"They also said that its breadth in the sky was around a [Pisan?] running distance or
stadium [about 200 yards], from which the fire sprayed and fell. And so far as I can judge
in the circumstances, it is [...] very strange to hear, and it would be much better had it not
appeared. For this apparition or comet gives certain indication that this Ruler of Provence

and other stretches by the sea shall encounter unexpected and unforeseen calamity through
war, fire, famine, pestilence or other strange diseases, or otherwise shall be attacked and
subjugated by foreign nations.
"This omen was seen by more than a thousand people, and I have been bidden to
confirm this and write to your Eminence about it, insofar as I have in my own estimation
seen and heard how it happened. And I pray Jesus Our Lord that he may grant Your Higl?
Eminence long life, and that he may richly multiply and extend your good fortune.
"Given in France, at Salon-de-Provence, this 19th of March in the year 1554. Your
Eminence's most humble and obedient servant, Michael de Nostre Dame."
3

Source: Translated from the French and printed in Nuremberg by M. Joachim Heller (with
the illustration given here), cited in Mathias Miles, Siebenbiirgischer Wurgengel (1670).
The above translation is from: www.propheties.it/Nostradamus/inedites/inedites3.htm.

13 June 1554, Iena, Germany
Spheres and disks

192. ^

A large number of spheres and disks flew over the city of Iena. They had sudden
variations of speed and turned to a red color as they flew north.
Source: Mathias Miles, Siebenbiirgischer Wiirgenengel (Hermannstadt, 1670).

5 March 1555, Buendia, Cuenca, Spain
Hovering cross
On Tuesday March 5th 1555, in Buendia, in the Spanish province of Cuenca, many people
saw an enormous object in the shape of a cross in the sky. It was stationary, floating next
to a new calvary (a life-size representation of a crucifix on raised ground) erected by the
Brotherhood of the True Cross.
Seven other women saw it there. The Inquisition of Cuenca dispatched somebody to
investigate the occurrence, but nineteen people described the sighting to notaries.
We include this case because of its interest as an unidentified aerial phenomenon,
though the religious significance of the case should not be ignored.

Source: William A. Christian, Local Religion in Sixteenth-Century Spain (Princeton
University Press, 1989), 186-7.

14 April 1561, Nuremberg, Germany
Vertical cylinders
At sunrise many spheres and disks, red, blue and black were seen to come out of two
vertical cylinders. They flew across the face of the Sun in an apparent "aerial fight". In a
contemporary engraving some of the spheres appear to have landed on a hill to the right of
the city, where much smoke is rising, while an elongated shape resembling a great black
spear is seen in a horizontal position.
124

Fig. 16: The sighting at Nuremberg
"Beyond balls of a red color, bluish or black, and circular disks, two large pipes were
seen...within which small and big pipes were found three balls, also four and more.
"All these elements started fighting against one another." The fight seems to have
lasted about an hour, then "as mentioned above, from the Sun and the sky, it fell onto the
earth as if everything was burning, and with great smoke everything got consumed."
Source: This pamphlet is preserved in the Wickiana collection of the Central Library in

Zurich: Erscheinung am Himmel uber Niirnberg am 14. April 1561. Zurich

Zentralbibliothek [ZB PAS II 12:60].

1 March 1564, near Brussels, Belgium
Aerial bombardment
In Gilbert's Annalen for 1806 is an account of a fearful phenomenon seen between Mechel
and Brussels. The sky was clear at first, but about 9 o'clock became fiery, throwing down
a reflection upon the earth so that everything became yellowish. In the meantime there
appeared in the sky figures of three men in royal robes with crowns upon their heads,
remaining visible for nearly three-fourths of an hour, when they gradually drew near
together and in the course of another 15 minutes disappeared. Then frightful stones fell,
large and small, some of which were five or six pounds in weight. So far as known none
of this material has found its way into collections.
Source: George P. Merrill and William F. Foshag, Minerals from earth and sky; Volume 3
(New York: Smithsonian Institution Series, Inc., 1938), 12-13.

7 August 1566, Basel, Switzerland: Aerial Combat
Many black spheres in apparent aerial combat. Several turn red and disintegrate.
"At sunrise were seen in the air numerous large black balls that flew at high speed towards
the Sun, then turned around, hitting one another as if they were fighting. Many of them
became red and fiery, and later they consumed themselves and were extinguished."
A contemporary engraving shows the spheres in the sky above the "Munster"
cathedral with the Antistitium.

Fig. 17: The sighting at Basel

125

Source: Samuel Coccius (Koch), Seltzamegestalt so in diesem M.D. LXVI. Jar, /gegen
auffgang und nidergang, under dreyen malen am Himmel/istgesehen worden, zu Basel
auff den xxvij. undxxviij. Hoxvmonat/ und volgends auf den vij Augsten (Basel: Samuel

Apiarium, 1566), ZB PAS II 6/5.

7 April 1567, Basel, Switzerland: A black sphere
A black sphere appears in the sky and covers the face of the Sun. It was seen all day long.

Source: Samuel Coccius (Koch), Wunderbare aber Warhaffte Gesicht vii erscheinungin
Wolcken des Himmels auff den andern tag Menens in diesem lauffenden acht und
sechtzigsten Jar. [...] Sampt angehencktergeschicht /inn dem vergangnen LXVII. Jar auff
den vii. tag/Aprellens ausz dew lufft geoffenbaret /bende vorhin niemalen/aber jetz.
under zur warming im truck auszgangen (Basel: Samuel Apiarius, 1558), Ms. F. 18.
26 September 1568, Tournai, Belgium
Great circles of fire
"Marvelous signs in the sky were seen from the seventh to the twelfth hour in the evening.
At first, great circles of fire were seen with rays emerging like suns dragging water (?),
afterwards a black cloud was seen and after that, great lights appeared. That being gone,
men on horses were seen fighting each other and it seemed as if several musketeers were
skirmishing against one another. Sparkles of fire were seen which illuminated the ground
with a terrible shine."
A possible interpretation of this case would invoke an aurora borealis, but not enough
is precisely known to make that determination, so we keep the event with reservation.

Source: Alex Pinchart, Memoires de Nicolas Soldoyer, as published in Memoires de
Pasquier de la Barre et de Nicolas Soldoyer, pour servir a 1 'histoire de Tournai (Brussels,
1865), vol. II, 304.

20 July 1571, Prague, Czechoslovakia
Mysterious round "chariot"
"About midnight there was a great wind over Prague that made such a rumbling noise
that it sounded like an earthquake. The people woke up with a start and hurried to their
windows. Looking towards the cattle fair (today Charles Square) they saw a marching
army coming along Spalena Street.
"The soldiers held their weapons in their hands and witnesses found their appearance
somewhat unnerving. Behind the soldiers came something resembling a large round
'chariot' drawn by oxen.
"The object, which made a loud noise, was apparently made of metal and had no
wheels. Eight large human figures marched behind the vehicle. They looked frightful
because they had no faces but wore enormous spurs on their feet, adding to the noise.
"Once they had crossed the square, a great fire appeared on the ground in front of the
Church of the Sacred Heart. On one side of the fire there were a large number of boxes,
and on the other there were barrels. These barrels looked as if they could have been used
to transport gunpowder. The big chariot arrived near the fire and all the boxes and the
barrels were thrown on it. Then again a frightful wind arose at the same time as a kind of
rain of fire and all this horrifying vision disappeared. However, a luminous object could
be made out in the air, a circle of fire that persisted until dawn. That year there was a great
famine and many people died."
126

20 September 1571, Lepanto, Italy
A flaming column guides the fleet
On the night of September 20th 1571 a fiery object was seen over Lepanto. The official
historian of the papal fleet of Rome, Alberto Guglielmotti, recorded the event in a report
based on statements given by two witnesses, Sereno and Caracciolo. In his summary,
Father Guglielmotti wrote that the "sign in the sky...was considered by everyone to be a
miracle."
"It was a clear, starry night with a cool wind coming from the north. Suddenly, a
colossal fire in the shape of a shining, flaming column was seen by everyone to cross the*
sky over a long period of time, filling all the witnesses with great admiration... All the
witnesses regarded this as a good omen and sensed they were on the verge of a great
victory. They believed this column of fire was showing them the way, guiding the
Christian fleet in the sea in the same way the people of Israel were guided across the
desert in biblical times.
On October 7th, Selim II, the Sultan of Turkey, was defeated at sea by the Christian
fleet, just off the shore of Lepanto.

27

Source: Padre Alberto Guglielmotti, La Guerra dei pirati e la marina pontificia dal 1500
al 1560 (Florence: Le Monnier, 1876).

16 February 1572, Constantinople, Turkey
Crosses in the air
The people of Constantinople were amazed to see cross-shaped objects flying above their
city.
It was said that for the consolation of the miserable Christians held captive in
Constantinople, and for the confusion of the Turks and Jews living in that city, God placed
three crosses in the sky above three Turkish mosques (Piali Baja, Capassi and Saint
Sophia). These appeared three days in a row, from Thursday to Saturday.
The crosses were seen by everyone in the area. They floated in the air, high above the
roofs of the mosques. Their color changed continuously. The Christians rejoiced and
gazed at the objects in wonder, while among the Turks there was only confusion and
uproar.
Finally, the Turks met with the Jews and asked them what they thought was
happening. The Jews replied that the Christians were great magicians, and were trying to
frighten them with their magic arts. The Turkish soldiers decided to retaliate more
violently than ever, crushing the Christian troops in armed combat. They even started to
shoot at the crosses. However, whenever a missile was about to hit them, the crosses
vanished momentarily, only to reappear immediately afterwards.

Source: Warhaffte Zeitung vnd beschreibung der Stadt Constantinopel dreyer Creutz
gesicht. AuffS. Sophia /Patriarcha / vnd Andrea Kirchen gesehen worden seind/Dreytag
auffjeder besonder / vnd allmal von einer Kirchen auff die andersich erzeigt /geschehflffl
den 16. Februarij des 72. jars. Auch ist warhafftig vnden hernach gesetztes schreiben von
Constantinopel aus / von einem Ritter Grio Malluj genandt / Bebstlicher Heiligkeit fiir
warhafftige zeitung zugeschrieben worden / den 10. Martij. im 72. Jar (Augsburg: Hans
Rogel, 1572), SUB Gottingen 4° H TURC. 712.

15 November 1572, Romerswil, Switzerland
A farmer's abduction
Hans Buchmann, a 50-year-old Swiss farmer from Romerswil, had gone to Sempach, a
nearby village. When he failed to return, his wife sent out their two sons to look for him.
The boys found their father's hat, coat and gloves. They also found his saber and its
sheath, lying on the path. This frightened them and they suspected that Klaus Buchmann,
their father's cousin, who had for years been an enemy to the family, could have murdered
him. The authorities had Buchmann's property searched, in vain.
Four weeks later, the family received news about Hans Buchmann's whereabouts: he
was in Milan! On 2 February 1573, two and a half months after he disappeared, he came
back. His wife and children were astonished to see that he did not have a single hair on his
head, his face or his chin. His face was so swollen that they didn't recognize him at first.
When the authorities learnt that the man had returned they interrogated him, as so much
trouble had been caused to cousin Klaus. The town chronicler, Renward Cysat
(1545-1614), was present at the interrogation.
Buchmann explained that on the day he disappeared he carried money to pay Hans
Schiirmann, the owner of the Romerswil inn, to whom he owed sixteen florins.
Schiirmann was not at home so he decided to go to Sempach on other business matters.
There he stayed until dawn, drinking something but very little, and then set off for home.
As he was passing through the forest he suddenly heard a strange noise. At first he thought
it was the buzz of a swarm of bees, but then he realized it sounded more like music. He
felt afraid, and was no longer sure where he was nor what was happening. He unsheathed
his sword and swiped at the air around him, losing his hat, gloves and coat in the process?
Before losing consciousness he could feel that he was being lifted up into the air. He was
9

taken to another country. He was disoriented and confused, with no idea where he was. He
felt pain and swellings in his face and around his head.
Two weeks after his abduction he found himself in Milan, with no idea how he had
got there. He was weak because he had not eaten or drunk anything in days, but he was
determined to find his way home. Hans Buchmann neither knew the city nor spoke the
language, and had no way of communicating his situation to anyone until he came across a
guard of German origin who took pity on him.

29 January 1574, Japan, exact location unknown
Flying umbrella CD
A large object shaped like an umbrella flew over, illuminating the sky and the ground. It
was seen twice.
Source: Brothers I, 1. We lack any earlier reference.

21 December 1576, Mount Kasuga, Japan
Wheel in the sky
A wheel-shaped object flew for an hour over the castle on Mount Kasuga. No historical
source is given for this tantalizing case, which would deserve further study by researchers
familiar with Japanese chronicles.
Source: Brothers magazine, again with no reference.

5 December 1577, near Tubingen, Germany
Flying black hats
"Numerous black clouds appeared around the Sun, similar to those we see during major
storms; shortly thereafter, other clouds of blood and fire emerged from the Sun, and yet
others yellow as saffron.
"From these clouds came luminous effects like big, high and broad hats, and the earth
itself appeared yellow, bloody, and covered with high and broad hats that took various
colors such as red, blue, green, and most of them black.
"Everyone can easily understand the meaning of this miracle, and know that God
wants men to repent and make penance. May the all-powerful God help all men to
recognize Him. Amen".
130

Source: Pierre Boaistuau, Histoires Prodigieuses (2nd edition, 1594). Also described in a
German broadsheet printed in early 1578: Schrockliche Newe Zeitung/ von dem

Wunderzeichen / welches den kurtzverschinenen funfften deB Christmonats /zu Alttorff inn
dem Land Wurtenberg istgesehen worden (Strassburg: Bernhard Jobin, 1578), ZB PAS II
15/1. This belongs to J.J. Wick's collection (Wickiana).

21 December 1578, Geneva, Switzerland
Signs and prodigies
"Marvellous and terrifying discourse of the signs and prodigies that appeared over the city
of Geneva the 21 day of December 1578" is the title of a brochure published by G.
Stadius, mathematician of the Duke of Savoy and noted astronomer. It describes strange
phenomena, including "a comet surmounted by a small cross."

Source: Discours merveilieux et espouventable des signes et prodiges qui sont apparuz au
ciel sur la ville de Genefve le XXL jour de decembre mil V. cens LXXVIII [par B. Du
Coudre, avec reponse de G. Stadius] (Paris: J. Pinart, 1579), Bibliotheque Nationale de
France, BN MP-3321.

18 February 1579, Paris, France: Flying intruder

A "great and wondrous flying serpent or dragon" appeared, according to a leaflet
{"canard") of the time.
It was seen by many over Paris from two o'clock in the afternoon until evening.

Source: A leaflet at the Library of Amiens entitled Du serpent ou dragon volant, grand et
merveilleux, apparu et veu par un chacun sur la ville de Paris, le mercredi XVIII febvrier
1579, depuis deux heures apres midijusques au soir (1579).

7 February 1580, Straits of Magellan
Red, fiery flying shield
In Viajes al Estrecho de Magallanes by Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa (ca. 1530-1592) we
read of this navigator's travels to the Strait of Magellan in 1579 and 1581. On Thursday,
February 7th 1580 at 1:00 A.M., he wrote that towards the south-southeast:
"We saw a round thing appear, red like fire, like a shield, that rose up on the air or dft
the wind. It became longer as it went over a mountain and, in the form of a lance high
above the mount, its shape became like a half-moon between red and white in color."
The three simple shapes accompanying the text are a circle, an oval and a half-moon.
Sarmiento de Gamboa compares the object to an "adarga." This was a round, oval or
heart-shaped shield used in the time of Don Quijote.

1586, Grangemuir, Scotland: Healer abducted by fairies
A woman named Alison Pearson confessed that she had met with the "Good Neighbors,"
who had given her a salve that could cure every disease. She had seen a man clad in green,
who was accompanied by many men and women making merry with good cheer and
music, and she was carried away by them. She was tried and put to death in 1586,
although she had treated the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, who stated he had received
benefit from it.

Source: James Grant, The Mysteries of all Nations: Rise and Progress of Superstition,
laws against and trials of witches, ancient and modern delusions (Edinburgh: Reid & Son,
1880), 517.

1586, Beauvais sous Matha near Tors, France Flying Hat-shaped object
A brown "hat" with horrible red colors was observed flying close to the steeple shortly
before sunset.

Fig. 18: Agrippa d'Aubigne
The witnesses were the great French poet Theodore Agrippa d'Aubigne (1552-1630) and
the Marquis de Tors.
"The Marquis, lord of that place, took his guest to a garden, shortly before sunset, and
they saw a round cloud come down over the hamlet of Beauvais-sous-Matha, with a color
that was horrid to see, for which one is forced to use a Latin word: subfusca (dark brown).
"This cloud resembled a hat with an ear in the middle, the color of the throat of an
Indian rooster (...) This hat with its sinister sign came into the steeple and melted there."
Source: Agrippa d'Aubigne, Histoire Universelle (1626), III, iv, ch. 3.

12 January 1589, Saint-Denis, France
Sky phenomena
A text published in French around 1599 makes the following report:
"We have seen at night two large clouds between Paris and St. Denis, which radiate^
great light, and they moved towards one another, joined and then separated again, and a
large number of sagettes (arrows) and spears of fire came out, which lasted a long time in
combat, then after having been fighting well, they retreated, then began to travel, and
passed over the City of Paris, and went straight on southwards.
"Then on Friday 13th of the month of January, we have also seen in the Sky a great
Crescent and one Star above it, like a Comet, which was bright all day, and people were
amazed. Christians prayed for God to save us from the menace. Amen"

Source: Anon., Signes merveilleux aparuz sur la ville & Chasteau de Bloys, en la
presence du Roy: & 1 'assistance du peuple. Ensemble les signes & Comete aparuz pres
Paris, le douziesme de Janvier, 1589 comme voyez par ce present portraict (1599?),
Bibliotheque Municipale de Blois, n° Inv.: LI 13.

1590, Scotland, location unknown
Tubular object
In 1590 Scottish peasants informed the shire reeve (the king's representative) that a large
tubular object had been seen hovering over their town. It hung motionless in the sky for
several minutes before it vanished.

2

Despite abundant references online and in print, an original source has not been
located.

1592, Pinner, Middlesex, England
Transported away! CD
Farm worker Richard Burt was confronted by a being he described as "a large black cat"
and was transported magically to Harrow.

Source: A Most Wicked Work of a Wretched Witch (1593).
15 October 1595, Targoviste, Wallachia, Romania Hovering object
When prince Michel the Brave besieged the city of Targoviste, the capital of Wallachia,
temporarily occupied by Turks, "a large comet appeared" above the military camp and
rested for two hours (according to an Italian report of the facts, redacted in Prague). After
three days the Turks were defeated. No such comet is mentioned in astronomical records.

Source: Calin N. Turcu, Enciclopedia observatiilor O.Z.N, din Romania (1517-1994)
(Bucharest: Ed. Emanuel, 1994), 3.

Epilogue to Part I-C

133

The end of the sixteenth century finds France devastated by fanaticism and a religious
civil war between Catholics and Protestants, only resolved in 1598 by the Edict of Nantes,
through which King Henry IV establishes for the first time the dual principles of freedom
of conscience and freedom of religion. Spain and France are both exhausted, while
England dominates the seas and becomes a great commercial and industrial power,
extending its colonial empire to America with the rise of Virginia.
It is the end of the Elizabethan period. Shakespeare and Cervantes reign over
literature.
Science now progresses in great strides: in the last decade Galileo publishes his
observations on falling bodies and (in 1593) invents the thermometer. Botanical gardens
are established at the University of Montpellier, and the first manuals of veterinary science
appear.
When 1600 comes around, astronomers Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler are
working together in Prague, while Dutch opticians have invented the telescope, Kircher
has built the first magic lantern and William Gilbert has published the first scientific
treatise on magnetism and electricity; The Western world has entered a new era.
134

PART I-D
Seventeenth-Century Chronology
Spurred on by strategic and scientific interest in navigation, astronomy underwent
unprecedented growth during the seventeenth century. Experimental and theoretical
publications flourished under the pen of Galileo, Huygens, Cassini, and numerous
observers of the Moon and planets using the newly-invented telescopes. Similar progress
revolutionized physics, mathematics and medicine, often in spite of the dictates of the
Church.
This movement towards better understanding of nature and man's relationship to it,
long repressed by religious ideology, found its expression in the "Invisible College" and
culminated in the creation of the Royal Society in London in 1660, while Harvard College
in the colony of Massachusetts was awarded its charter in 1650.
Similar forces were at play in Asia, where Chinese naturalist Chen Yuan-Lung
published his treatise on "New Inventions," and in Japan where Seki Kowa, "the
Arithmetical Sage," anticipated many of the discoveries of Western mathematics. He was
the first person to study determinants in 1683, ten years before Leibniz used determinants
to solve simultaneous equations.
Political aspirations created turmoil in the background, particularly in England with
the parliamentarian revolution led by Cromwell, the restoration of the Stuart monarchy
and the further upheaval leading William of Orange to the throne. France fared better,

dominating European culture and politics for most of the century, until the disastrous
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes that forbade Protestantism and drove leading Huguenot
families out of the country: hundreds of thousands fled to Switzerland, Germany, Holland
and Great Britain, ruining entire provinces and decimating French industry at the end of
the reign of Louis XIV. Huguenots took the art of clock making to Geneva, the steamboat
to England and paper making to Holland.
News of extraordinary phenomena was greeted with keen interest, either for their
"philosophical" value or as omens of mystical importance. Antiquarians and Chroniclers
collected such reports and compiled information from various countries, including North
and South America. We even begin to find reports of unusual aerial sightings in the pag£¥
of the early scientific journals, like the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
often in terms that seem surprisingly open and free compared to the staid, self-censored,
dogmatic, and often arrogant scientific literature of today.

23 January 1603, Besan^on, France
Self-propelled cloud
"In the year 1603, being in Besangon for the duties of my charge as Visitor to Sainte
Claire monastery, it happened that on a Thursday, the 23th day of January, between 7 and
8 P.M., we were told that all the people were assembling in the streets, terrified. I went
out, and like the others I saw a great light in the air over the cathedral, covering the whole
of Mount Saint Etienne with a round-shaped, heavy cloud, reddish in color, while all the
air was clear and the sky so devoid of fog that the stars were seen shining brilliantly.
"This light remained quasi-motionless over Mount Saint Etienne, and from there we
saw it coming so low that it nearly touched the houses and lit up the nearby streets, but
with a motion so slow that it was hardly noticeable, and it halted for at least a quarter of an
hour over Saint Vincent Abbey, where some pieces of relics of two glorious Saints are
kept. Then, escaping over the Grande place of Chammar to the Doubs river, it went away
through the Grande rue that goes to the bridge, and straight to the cathedral where it
vanished, but as we said before, with such a slow motion that its travel lasted until 9:30 at
night, which is to say at least two hours."

Source: Reverend Jacques Fodere, Narration historique et topographique des convens de
J'ordre de St-Frangois (Lyon: Pierre Rigaud, 1619), 10-11.

May 1606, Kyoto, near Nijo Castle, Japan
Hovering red wheel
Numerous witnesses, including Samurais, see balls of fire kept flying over Kyoto and one
night, a red wheel had come over and hovered above Nijo castle. We have not located an
original Japanese source for this interesting case.
Source: Michel Bougard, La chronique des OVNI (Paris: Delarge, 1977), 86.

1608, between Angouleme and Cognac, France
Flying warriors
"The day was calm and clear, and in an instant a large number of small, thick clouds
appeared. They came down to the ground and turned into warriors. Their number was
estimated between 10,000 and 12,000, all handsome and tall, covered with blue armor,
aligned behind deployed red and blue banners (...)
"This sight was such that peasants and even the nobility took alarm. They assembled
in large number to observe these soldiers' progress; they noticed that when they came near
a thick wood, to maintain their good order, they rose above it, only touching the leaves of
the trees with the bottom of their feet, eventually walking on the ground again to a forest
where they disappeared.
"I have written this based on a manuscript report by the late M. Prevost, curate of
Lussac les Eglises."
137

Source: Chronique de Pierre Robert, cited by A. Catinat, Chartes, Chroniques et

Memoriaux (Lyon, 1874).

1 August 1608, Genoa harbour, Italy
Fighting creatures from the sea
Two human figures holding what looked like flying snakes were seen fighting over the
sea. Only their torso was visible above the waves. Their cries were so "horrible" some of
the witnesses were sick with fear. They were seen repeatedly for a couple of weeks, and
about 800 cannon shots failed to scare them away.
It should be noted that this event is often confused with a series of unrelated weather
phenomena between Nice and Lambesc in France, where "bloody rains" were reported.

Source: Anon., Discoursau Vray des terribles et espouvantables signes... (Troyes: Odard

Aulmont, 1608).

15 August 1608, Genoa harbour, Italy Three coaches drawn by fiery creatures

"Over the sea off the harbor of Genoa, there appeared three coaches, each drawn by
six fiery figures resembling dragons. With the said coaches were the aforesaid signs that
still had their serpents and went on screaming their horrible cries and came close to
Genoa, so that the spectators, or at least most of them, fled in fear of such a prodigy.
However, when they had made three times a trip along the harbor and uttered such
powerful screams that they resounded across the mountains around, they got lost over the
sea and no news of them has been heard since.

Fig. 19: Discours Espouvantable...

"This caused great damage to the citizens of Genoa, as among them the son of Sr.
Gasparino de Loro and also the brother of Sr. Anthonio Bagatello. Several women were
also afflicted and had such fear that it caused their death."

138

Source: Anon., Discoursau Vray des terribles et espouvantables signes... (Troyes: Odard

Aulmont, 1608).

15 February 1609, Tiannin mountain, China
Blinding "eye" in the sky
Bright lights illuminated the temple walls: an object like a ship or an eye with blinding
light was seen in the sky.
Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 43, citing Feng Mengzhen,

Collection of Stories from the Palace of Snow.

3 July 1612, Switzerland: Battling sky armies

According to this broadsheet, some terrible and wondrous signs were seen in the heavens
in Switzerland, on the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th of July, 1612.
They included three suns, three rainbows, a white cross, and two battling armies.
The text in this broadsheet contains rhymed strophes. It describes the events rather
superficially and repetitively addresses its Christian readers 'young and old' to repent their
sins because wondrous signs from heavens are indicators of bad times, war, and menace.

Fig. 20: Sky armies over Switzerland
Source: Beschreibung der am 3.4.5. vnd 6. Julii dises 1612. Jars erschienen vnd

grausamen erschrocklichen Wunderzeichen am Himmel (Basel: Johann Schroter, 1612).
With 22 strophes from Christian Fischer. Herzog August Bibliothek, HAB 38.25 Aug. 2,
fol. 799.

1613, Perth, Scotland: Abducted by fairies
Isobel Haldane testified that she was carried out of her bed, "whether by God or the Devil,
she knew not," to a hillside which opened before her. She went in, and stayed three days
in "the fairy kingdom." Eventually she was brought out by "a man with a grey beard" who
taught her to cure diseases and foretell the future.
Far from being rare, such reports of abductions by non-human creatures became
commonplace during the 17th century, eventually giving rise to accusations of commerce
with the Devil. Unfortunately many of these stories did not include a date or a place. This
one is an exception.
Source: Robert Pitcairn, Criminal trials in Scotland (Edinburgh, 1833).

4 March 1614, Kinki, West Japan
Four-sided object
A single object was seen in the sky, described as a four-sided figure. Unfortunately, we
have not been able to uncover a quotation from an original source.
Source: Quincy catalog typescript, and the "Nihon-Kaikimonogatari. "

139

1619, Fluelen, Lake Lucerne, Switzerland
Fiery dragon
Herr Christophorus Schere, prefect of Uri County, saw a bright, long object, fiery in color,
near Fluelen, flying along Lake Uri: "As I was contemplating the serene sky by night, I
saw a very bright dragon flying across from a cave in a great rock in the mount called
Pilatus toward another cave, known as Flue, on the opposite side of the lake.
"Its wings were agitated with much celerity; its body was long as well as its tail and
neck. Its head was that of a serpent with teeth, and when it was flying, sparkles were
coming out of it like the ones thrown by an incandescent iron when struck by smiths on an
anvil. At first, I thought it was a meteor, but after observing more closely, (I saw) it was
truly a dragon from the recognizable motion of the members. This I write to you with
respect, that the existence of dragons in nature is not to be doubted any more."
Source: Athanassius Kircher, Mundus Subterraneus (Amsterdam, 1665), Lib. VIII, 93-94.

1619, Prague, Czechoslovakia: Flying Globes
A succession of fiery globes is observed. Some of them split into several parts or other
globes. The report reads:
"A strange and prodigious thing was seen in a village that is 6 leagues from Prague,
the capital city of Bohemia. Never had we seen such a spectacular or frightful sign before.
The inhabitants of the village were on guard as the country is full of soldiers, because of

the partialities and differences that exist in the empire today. The village priest was with
them at about 10:00 in the evening. He was praying, looking up at the sky, when suddenly
he stopped, astounded by what he saw. He could see a globe that resembled the moon, but
fiery. It divided into two parts, and one of the parts divided into four smaller globes.
"The most amazing thing was that one of the globes disappeared, and in its place we
saw a bloody crucifix. These things stayed [in the sky] for a short time, and then
disappeared gradually, finally vanishing into a big hole. Then we just saw a great globe
which resembled the moon, as we had witnessed at the beginning. This whole process
repeated three or four times, and then everything disappeared."

Source: An 8-page pamphlet titled Signes Prodigieux d'un Globe de Feu apparu en
Allemagne, Capable d'Espouventer toute la Chrestiente, y ay ant este veu un Crucifix
sanglant (Prodigious Signs of a Globe of Fire that appeared in Germany, Able to Frighten
all the Believers, and a Bloody Crucifix) (Paris: Pierre Bertault, 1619).

1 February 1620, Quimper-Corentin, France
Green flying creature
Many witnesses: thunder falls on the cathedral. A green "demon" is seen inside the fire.
"On Saturday a great disaster took place in the town of Quimper-Corentin; namely
that a beautiful and tall pyramid (note: bell tower) covered with lead, being atop the nave
of the great church, and over the cross of that said nave, was burnt by the lightning and
fire from the sky, from the top down to the said nave, without any way to remedy it.
"And to know the beginning and the end, it is that about seven and a half to eight in
the morning, there was a clap of thunder and terrible lightning, and at that instant was seen

a horrible and frightening demon, taking advantage of a great downpour of hail, seizing
the said pyramid from the top under the cross, being the said demon of green color, having
a long tail of the same color. No fire or smoke appeared on the said pyramid, until about
one in the afternoon, when smoke started coming out from the top of it, and lasted a
quarter of an hour, and from the same place fire appeared, while it ran higher and lower,
so that it became so large and frightening that it was feared the whole church would burn,
and not only the church but the whole town.
"All the treasures of the church were taken outside; neighbors (of the church) had
their goods transported as far as they could, in fear of the fire. There were more than 400
men to extinguish the fire, and they could not do anything to stop it. Processions went
around the church and other churches, all in prayers. Finally, for all resolution, holy relics
were placed on the nave of the said church, near and before the fire. Gentlemen of the
Chapter (in absence of Monsignor the Bishop) began conjuring this evil demon, which
everyone could see clearly in the fire, sometimes green, yellow, and blue. (They) threw
Agnus Dei into it, and nearly a hundred and fifty barrels of water, forty or fifty carts of
manure, yet the fire went on burning.
"For an ultimate resolution a loaf of rye bread worth four sols was thrown into it,
within which a consecrated host had been placed, then holy water with the milk of a wet
nurse of good morals, and all that was thrown into the fire; at once the demon was forced
to leave the fire and before getting out it made such trouble that we all seemed to be
burned, and he left at six hours and a half on the said day, without doing any damage
(thank God) except for the total ruin of the said pyramid, which is of the consequence of
twelve thousand ecus at least.
"This evil being out, the fire was conquered. And shortly afterwards, the loaf of rye
bread was found still intact, without any damage, except that the crust was somewhat
blackened. And about eight or nine and a half, after the fire was out, the bell rang to
assemble the people, to give graces to God. The gentlemen of the Chapter, with the choir
141

and musicians, sang the Te Deum and a Stabat Mater, in the chapel of the Trinity, at nine
in the evening."
Source: Lengley-Dufresnoy Vol. I, Part 2, 109, citing La Vision Publique d'un Horrible et

tres Epouvantable Demon, sur l'Eglise Cathedrale de Quimper-Corentin, en Bretagne, le
Premier Jour de ce mois de Fevrier 1620. Lequel Demon consuma une pyramide par le
feu, etysurvlnt un grand tonnerre etfeu du Ciel (A Paris, chez Abraham Saugrain, en
l'lsle du Palais, jouxte la copie imprimee a Rennes par Jean Durand, rue Saint Thomas,
pres les Carmes, 1620).

9 April 1620, Geneva, Switzerland
Flying hats and men in black
"Two suns were seen, one red and the other one yellow, hitting against each other (...)
Shortly afterwards there appeared a longish cloud, the size of an arm, coming from the
direction of the sun, which stopped near the sun, and from that cloud came a large number
of people dressed in black, armed like men of war. Then arrived other clouds, yellow as
saffron, from which emerged some 'reverberations' (?) resembling tall, wide hats, and the
earth was seen all yellow and bloody. The sun became double and it all ended with a raift
of blood.

12

Source: Effroyable bataille apergue stir la ville de Genesvre le dimanche des Rameaux

dernier... (brochure published in 1620) cited in Les Soucoupes chez Heidi (GREPI, 1977).

13 October 1621, Nimes, France
Fiery chariots, a great sun
"Over the city of Nimes, about 9 to 10 P.M., over the amphitheater, was seen something
like a great sun, very resplendent, which was surrounded by a number of other luminous
torches.
"It seemed to want to move straight towards the Roman Tower, over which appeared
something like fiery chariots surrounded by very bright stars."

Source: Les Signes Effroyables Nouvellement Apparus..., Cited by Veronica Magazine

(Gouiran & Lamblard, 1976). Also see Michel Bougard, La chronique des OVNI (Paris:
Delarge Ed., 1977), 92-93.

12 May 1624, Anhalt, Germany
Chariots in the sky
From six to eight o'clock in the evening a multitude of men and chariots were observed,
emerging from the clouds over Gierstedt (Bierstedt), Anhalt, in Germany.

Source: L. Brinckmair, The Warnings of Germany (London: John Norton, 1638), 18-19.

1634, Wiltshire, England
Dancing elves, a paralyzed witness
Mr. Hart was paralyzed and assaulted by a group of dancing elves at night. He woke up in
a fairy ring.
The curate of a Wiltshire 'Latin Schoole', Mr. Hart was assaulted by a group of elves
one night in 1633 or 1634. Whilst walking over the 'downes,' he saw "an innumerable
quantitie of pigmies or very small people" dancing in a typical fairy ring "and making all
maner of small odd noyses." Mr. Hart, "being very greatly amaz'd, and yet not being able,
as he sayes, to run away from them, being, as he supposes, kept there in a kind of
enchantment," fell to the ground in a daze. The "little creatures" surrounded their prey and
" pinch'd him all over, and made a sorte of quick humming noyse all the time..." Hart
awoke to find himself in the centre of a ring pressed into the grass—a fairy ring. "This
relation I had from him myselfe, a few days after he was so tormented," writes Aubrey.
Source: K. Briggs, A Dictionary of Fairies (London: Penguin Books, 1976).

Circa 1635, Port-Louis, Brittany, France
A Procession of sky beings

143

A 60-year old man named Jean Le Guen, who lived in Riantec near Port-Louis, asserted
that he had observed a procession of beings he took to be "angels" in the sky. They were
going from Port-Louis to Caudan.

Source: The Diary of Jesuit Father Julien Maunoir; written in 1672, recording a statement
about the case by the Lord of Lestour. Published as Miracles et Sabbats. Journal du Pere
Maunoir, missions en Bretagne (1631-1650) presented by Eric Lebec (Paris: Editions de
Paris, 1997), 85.

28 May 1637, Between Chartres and Paris, France
Three unexplained "stars"
Travelers marveled at three large 'stars' surrounded by smaller ones, with a long streak of
other 'stars.' In the absence of a better description, including the duration and trajectory of
the phenomena, the skeptic may well decide that the travelers in question simply saw a
series of bright meteors.

March 1638, Muddy River near Charlton,
Massachusetts: Missing time among the Puritans
Puritan James Everell and two others were stunned as they saw a luminous mass that
hovered and returned over a three-hour period. Their boat was pulled upstream by the
phenomenon.
The settling of the first Puritan colony in Boston was chronicled by Governor John
Winthrop, who arrived in Massachusetts Bay in 1630 with one thousand English
emigrants. A historian himself, Winthrop kept a record of the colony's first years in the
New World. His journal is far from being a mere collection of unlikely anecdotes or
village gossip. It is quite significant, therefore, that he regarded two spectacular sightings
of unexplained phenomena as being sufficiently important to be recorded for posterity.
The first sighting took place in March 1638. A member of the Puritan Church, James
Everell, "a sober, discreet man," was crossing the Muddy River one evening in a small
boat with two companions. Suddenly a great luminous mass appeared in the sky above the
river. It seemed to dart back and forth over the water. When it remained motionless, it
"flamed up" and seemed to measure three yards square. When it moved, it "contracted
into the figure of a swine" and flew away towards Charlton.
It did this repeatedly over a period of two or three hours, always returning briefly to
the same spot above the water before shooting off again.
When the light had finally vanished, Everell and his friends stood up and were
surprised to learn that the boat was now further upstream than it should have been, as if it
had been pushed, pulled or carried by an unknown force. In fact they had been carried
against the tide to their original starting point, one mile away.
144

Why the light would be swine-shaped is a mystery not even the Puritan colonists
could interpret, though it should be noted Everell was a leather dresser by trade, and he
could have sought a familiar shape in an otherwise amorphous light.
It is curious that the men observed that "two or three hours" passed during the
spectacle. Can we believe they sat watching the phenomenon for such a long time?
The mysterious repositioning of the boat could suggest that they were unaware of part
of their experience. Some researchers would interpret this as a possible alien abduction if
it happened today.
Any speculation at this late date is merely conjecture, but it is interesting to note that
at least a superficial resemblance exists between this case and recent claims in the
American abduction literature.
Source: John Winthrop, The History of New England from 1630 to 1649 (Boston: Little,
Brown and Company, 1853), 349-350.

April 1639, Yuan, Fengxian, Shansi province, China Flying star at funeral
A red, white, yellow and blue "star" flew over a funeral, circling the village for a long
time. The villagers were presenting their condolences to the family of Yuan Yingta, a
minister of war under the Ming dynasty who had sacrificed himself on the battlefield
while resisting the Man army. Suddenly a luminous object like a star, red, white, yellow
and blue in color, flew over the funeral procession. This brilliant thing did not touch the
ground, but it flew around the village for a long time, then rose up in the sky again. Its
light was visible five kilometers away.

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 45, citing scholar Lou Ao,

Histoire Locale du District Fengxian.

July 1639, Santiago, Spain: ships in the sky
A short pamphlet published in Seville in 1639 titled An Account of the Prodigious Visions

of Armies of Men, Standards, Flags, Vessels, and Other Things, that Visibly have been
Seen over a Long Time, near the Town of Santiago in Galicia, in the Fields ofLerida,
since June
to this Present Year of 1639, reported that "in Santiago three ships

appeared in the air with the sound of drums and many people." Unfortunately no more
details are given.

Source: Relacion certissima de las prodigiosas visiones...que visiblemente se han visto
largo tiempo, cerca de la ciudad de Santiago de Galizia... (Seville, 1639).

9 May 1641, Braga, Portugal: Flying disk, entities
A flat disk ("wafer") appeared in the sky along with two human figures designated as
"angels." There were numerous witnesses, and the original text makes fascinating reading:

"Year of the birth of Our Lord Jesus Christ 1641, May 9th, in this city of Braga, in
the lodgings of Reverend Doctor Jao d'Abreda Rocha, ecclesiastic judge and general vicar
of this court, the archbishop of Braga: there the Reverend Judge was alerted by D. Gastao
Coutinho, general of the province of Entre Douro e Minho, of the fact that many people
going towards the area of Porto acting upon a warning given in this city that the enemies
were approaching in that area, saw some signs on the moon, in which there appeared a
Wafer and two human figures that looked like Angels; and that the said judge know the
truth of it: about which the Reverend Doctor ordered this writ to be made, that I sign; and
he asked the following witnesses. Father Simao Alvares, apostolic notary, wrote it."
Source: Francisco Lopez Liureyro, Favores do Ceo. Do brago do Christo que se

despregou da cruz, & de outras marauilias dignas de notar. Dedicados ao III. me Senhor

D. Rodrigo da Cunha... (Lisbon: Antonio Alvarez, 1642); reprinted as Favores do ceo a

Portugal na acclamagao do rei D. Joao IV e acabamento da oppressao dos reis
Filippes.por Francisco Lopes, livreiro lisbonense. Precedidos d'una noticia
bibliographica do auctor, escripta pelo Professor Pereira-Caldas (Porto: Ernesto

146

Chadron and Braga: Eugenio Chadron, 1642, 1871).

13 April 1641, Aragon, Spain: Apparitions
Domingo Sanchez, gardener at the Monastery of Maria de Aragon, who was sworn to
chastity, requested permission to marry. On the night of April 13th, in bed with these
thoughts, he saw a demon that pulled him out and dragged him for a long time around his
lodgings, hitting him. The man sought help from the Virgin, who appeared, surrounded by
lights and "aided him until dawn."

Source: Jose Pellicer de Salas y Tobar, in his Avisos historicos, a compilation of historical
reports spanning the period May 24th 1639 to November 29th 1644.

4 May 1641, Madrid, Spain: Unexplained black cloud
At 9:00 P.M., "the sky being very calm, without there being a single cloud in it, (Jose
Pellicer reported) an extremely black and dark cloud, that approached from somewhere
between the east and the north, dilated and narrow, crossing between the west and
Midday, that was stationary for some time" - giving the impression that Pellicer may have
seen something resembling the 'cloud cigars' dealt with in modern reports.
Pellicer goes on to mention a burst of sound of unknown origin in the sky over
Molina de Aragon. The people there heard "loud noises, bugles, drums, as if an invisible
ferocious battle were happening but without anything to be seen."
Source: Jose Pellicer de Salas y Tobar, Avisos historicos, op. cit.

14 September 1641, Akhaltsike, Georgia
Blue wheel descending
Armenian chronicler Zacharia Sarcofag saw a strange phenomenon at sunset. The sky was
not yet dark when suddenly "the ether on the eastern side was torn up and a big dark-blue

light began to descend. Being wide and long, it came down approaching the Earth and it
illuminated everything around, more brightly than the sun."
The forward part of the light "revolved like a wheel, moving to the north, calmly and
slowly emitting red and white light, and in front of the light, at a distance of an open hand,
there was a star the size of Venus. The light was still visible until my father had sung,
weeping, six sharakans, after which it moved away. Later we heard that people saw this
miraculous light up to Akhaltsike."
A sharakan is a brief prayer sung over two to three minutes, so the phenomenon
would have lasted at least 15 minutes, according to researcher Mikhail Gershtein.
147

Source: Zacharia Sarcofag, On the Fall of Light from the Sky. Cited by M. B. Gershtein,
"A Thousand Years of Russian UFOs," RIAP Bulletin (Ukraine) 7, 4, October-December
2001.

3 July 1642, Olesa de Montserrat, Catalonia, Spain
Globe, changing its appearance
Joseph Aguilera and others saw a globe changing to "three moons," later an enormous
light seen for one hour.
Source: Guijarro, Josep, Guia de la Cataluha Magica (Barcelona: Ediciones Martinez
Roca, 1999), 48.

18 January 1644, Boston, Mass.: Luminous figures
Three men coming to Boston saw two "man-shaped lights" come out of the sea. About 8
P.M. several inhabitants of an area of Boston located near the sea saw a light the size of
the full moon rise in the northeast. Shortly thereafter, another light appeared in the east.
The witnesses observed a curious game of hide-and-seek between the two objects.
During this celestial ballet, several persons known to be sober and pious, who were
aboard a boat between Dorchester and Boston, claimed they heard a voice in the sky
uttering the following words in a most terrible voice: "Boy, boy, come away..." These
calls were repeated about 20 times, coming from various directions.
Source: John Winthrop, Winthrop's Journal, "History of New England" (1630-1649)
(New York: Barnes and Noble, 1959).

25 January 1644, Boston, Massachusetts
A Voice from the light
Luminous objects were seen sparkling, emitting flames. Again, the aerial ballet of the
previous week was observed and a voice calling out: "Boy, boy, come away."

Source: John Winthrop, Winthrop's Journal, "History of New England" (1630-1649)
(New York: Barnes and Noble, 1959).

April 1645, Caudan, Brittany, France
A Procession of sky beings
A sixty-year old man named Jean Coachon, who lived in Calan, near Lanvodan and
Vannes, stated that he had witnessed a procession of sky beings he called "angels,"
circling above the church, with the Virgin among them. This was related by the Lord o f
Lestour, who collected such stories.

148

Source: Eric Lebec, ed., Miracles et Sabbats. Journal du Pere Maunoir, missions en
Bretagne (1631-1650) (Paris: Les editions de Paris, 1997), 85-86.

11 November 1645, Location unknown
Unidentified planetoid near Venus
A body large enough to be a satellite was seen near Venus from Naples by the astronomer
Francesco Fontana. He made further observations of the "satellite" on December 25th
1645 and January 22nd, 1646. Jean-Charles Houzeau, director of the Royal Observatory
of Brussels, baptized the satellite with the name "Neith" in the 1880s.

Source: Francesco Fontana, Novae coelestium terrestriumq[ue] rerum observationes..
(Naples, 1646).

April 1646, St. Teath, Cornwall
Abductee becomes a healer
A woman named Anne Jefferies fell ill and claimed to have acquired healing powers after
being abducted by six 'small people'. Anne Jefferies was the daughter of a poor laborer
who lived in the parish of St. Teath. She was born in 1626, and is said to have died in
1698.
When she was nineteen years old, Anne went to live as a servant in the family of Mr.
Moses Pitt, where she suffered a sudden loss of consciousness. A letter from Moses Pitt to
of
the Right Reverend Dr. Edward Fowler, the Bishop of Gloucester, dated May 1 , 1696,
explains how one day Jefferies had been knitting in an arbour in the garden when
something so shocking happened to her "that she fell into a kind of Convulsion-fit." Soon
afterwards members of the family found her writhing on the ground and carried her
indoors, where she was taken to her bedroom and allowed to rest. When she regained
consciousness she startled everyone gathered at her bedside by crying out, "They are all
just gone out of the Window; do you not see them?" This and similar outbursts were
immediately "attributed to her Distemper," her employers supposing she was suffering a
bout of feverish iight-headedness.'
Anne Jefferies remained in an unstable condition for some time, unable even to "so
much as stand on her Feet." Gradually, however, she managed to recover from her

sickness and by the following year was able to reassume her duties as a maid but she had
not exactly become her old self again. Pitt writes that the first indication that Jefferies had
acquired new skills came "one Afternoon, in the Harvest-time," when his mother slipped
and broke her leg on the way back from the mill. A servant was told to saddle a horse and
fetch Mr. Hob, the surgeon, from a nearby town. "Anne Jefferies came into the room and
saw Mrs. Pitt with her leg outstretched. She asked her to show her the wound, which the
woman did after some persuasion, and to rest the leg on her lap. Stroking it with her hand,
Anne asked whether the woman was feeling any better. My Mother confess'd to her she
did. Upon this she desired my Mother to forbear sending for the Chyrurgeon, for she
would, by the Blessing of God, cure her leg."
What surprised Mrs. Pitt the most was not the maid's newfound healing powers but
the fact that she seemed to know exactly when and where her fall had happened. Yet how
could she? Moses writes that his mother demanded an explanation.
Anne said "You know that this my Sickness and Fits came very suddenly upon me,
which brought me very low and weak, and have made me very simple. Now the Cause of
my Sickness was this. I was one day knitting of Stockings in the Arbour in the Gardens,

9

and there came over the Garden-hedge of a sudden six small People, all in green Clothes,
which put me into such a Fright and Consternation that was the Cause of this my great
Sickness; and they continue their Appearance to me, never less that 2 at a time, nor never
more than 8: they always appear in even Numbers, 2, 4, 6, 8. When I said often in my
Sickness, They were just gone out of the Window, it was really so; altho you thought me
light-headed (...) And thereupon in that Place, and at that time, in a fair Path you fell, and
hurt your Leg. I would not have you send for a Chyrurgeon, nor trouble your self, for I
will cure your Leg."
From that time on, Anne Jefferies became famous throughout England as a faithhealer and fairy contactee. Moses Pitt writes that "People of all Distempers, Sicknesses,
Sores, and Ages" travelled from far and wide to Cornwall to see the girl and receive her
magical treatment. She charged no fee for her work."

Unfortunately, so many strange goings on and her growing reputation as a seer
worried the local authorities. They sent "both the Neighboro-Magistrates and Ministers" to
question the maid on the nature of her supernatural contacts. Despite hearing Anne
Jefferies' "very rational Answers to all the Questions they then ask'd her," her
interrogators concluded that the spirits she spoke to were "the Delusion of the Devil," and
they "advised her not to go to them when they call'd her." Not long after this, the Justice
of the Peace in Cornwall, John Tregagle Esq., issued a warrant for her arrest.
Jefferies spent three months in Bodmin Gaol. When she was finally freed it was
decided that she could not return to the house of the Pitts, so she went to stay with Moses
Pitt's aunt, Mrs. Francis Tom, near Padstow. There "she liv'd a considerable time, and did
many great Cures," but later moved into her own brother's house and eventually married.
150

Source: Letter from Moses Pitt to the Bishop of Gloucester in Robert Hunt, Popular

Romances of West England (1871).

May 1646, The Hague, Netherlands
Fleet of airships, occupants
Unknown people and animals were seen in the sky of The Hague. A fleet of airships came
from the southeast, carrying many occupants. It came close to the aerial spectacle. A huge
fight ensued.
When the phenomenon vanished, people saw "something like a huge cloud that
appeared at a place where nothing was visible before."

Source: Signes from Heaven; or severall Apparitions seene and hearde in the Ayre...
(London: T. Forcey, 1646).

21 May 1646, Newmarket & Thetford, England
Vertical pillar of light
"Betwixt Newmarket and Thetford in the foresaid county of Suffolk, there was observed a
pillar or a Cloud to ascend from the earth, with the bright hilts of a sword towards the
bottom of it, which piller (sic) did ascend in a pyramidal form, and fashioned it self into
the forme of a spire or broach Steeple, and there descended also out of the skye, the forme
of a Pike or Lance, with a very sharp head or point (...) This continued for an hour and a
half.

Source: Signes from Heaven: or severall Apparitions seene and heard in the Ayre...
(London: T. Forcey, 1646).

1648, Edinburgh, Scotland
Flight aboard a fiery coach

In the spring of 1670, Captain of the Town Guard and highly respected preacher Major
Thomas Weir (ca. 1596-1670) and his sister Jane Weir confessed to a series of terrible
offenses. Thomas' confession began with a detailed summary of his sex crimes which was
horrible enough in the eyes of the city officials in Edinburgh. But it was when he admitted
to being a witch and a sorcerer that the authorities became truly anxious. Weir said that he
and his sister had had dealings with demons and fairies, to whom they had duly sold their
immortal souls.
The Devil appeared to Jane in the guise of a midget-like woman. Both she and her
brother had been carried off by strange entities on several occasions. They said that in
1648 they were transported between Edinburgh to Musselburgh in a fiery "coach," and
they had also been taken for a ride in a similarly fiery "chariot" from their house in the
West Bow (a z-shaped street near Edinburgh Castle) to Dalkeith.
It is interesting that Thomas Weir was driven to coming clean about his private life
because of the guilt he felt from having consorted with devils. Major Weir was an active
member of a strict Protestant sect. Betraying God was, for him, his least forgivable crime.
However, he was old and sick and he had been an important figure in society for as long
as people could remember, so at the beginning he had trouble persuading the courts to
arrest him. When at last he and his sister were remanded in custody she alone was
convicted of witchcraft, while he was "only" found guilty of fornication, incest and
bestiality (!).
Jane Weir was hanged and burnt at the stake at Grass Market on April 12 , 1670, and
her brother the day before. Tradition holds that both refused to repent on the scaffold,
crying out that they wished to die as shamefully as they deserved. When requested to pray
on the eve of his execution, Major Weir answered, screaming, "Torment me no more-I am
tormented enough already!" This gives the impression that he was convinced of the
physical nature of his acts and of his contact with malign spirits, as does his reply on the
151

th

scaffold when asked to beg God for mercy: "Let me alone - I will not - I have lived as a
beast, and I must die as a beast!" Jane Weir's final words were along the same lines.

Source: Charles McKay, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness
of Crowds (1841).
1650, Limerick, Ireland: Flying globe with light beam
A luminous globe brighter than the Moon shed a vertical light on the city, and then it
faded as it passed over the enemy camp.
Source: Dominic O'Daly, History of the Geraldines (1665).

Circa 1650, Fisherton Anger, Wiltshire, England
Contact with Spirits
A woman named Anne Bodenham, formerly a servant to Dr. Lamb of London, was
accused of witchcraft and commerce with devils. She was eventually put to death in 1653
at the age of 80.
The cleric who recorded her trial noted that:

"Arrived at the place of execution, she attempted to go at once up the ladder, but was
restrained. Mr. Bower pressing her to confess, she steadfastly refused, and cursed those
who detained her."

Fig. 21: The spirit creatures in Anne Bodenham's magic, emerging from a
circle of fire.
A maid testified at the trial that she had seen Anne Bodenham invoke the Devil. After
Anne had made a circle with a stick, and filled it with burning coals,

" Then appeared two spirits in the likeness of great boys with Jong shagged
hair and stood by her looking over her shoulder, and the Witch took the maid's
forefinger of her right hand, in her hand, and pricked it with a pin and squeezed

out the blood, and put it into a pen, and put the pen into the maid's hand, and
held her hand to write in a great book, and one of the spirits laid his hand or
claw over the witches, whilst the maid wrote, and when she had done writing
whilst their hands were together, the Witch said Amen, and made the Maid say
Amen, and the Spirits said Amen, Amen.
"And the Spirits hand did feel cold to the maid as it touched her hand, when
the witches hand and hers were together writing."
Source: James Bower, The Tryal, Examination and Confession of mistris Bodenham,
before the Lord chief Baron Wild, & the Sentence of Death pronounc'd against her, etc.
(London: printed for G. Horton, 1653). See also Doctor Lamb revived, or, Witchcraft
condemn 'd in Anne Bodenham a Servant of his, who was Arraigned and Executed the Lent
Assizes last at Salisbury... by Edmond Bower an eye and ear Witness of her Examination
and Confession (London: printed by T.W. for Richard Best, and John Place, 1653).

22 December 1651, Almerdor, Holland
Flying dutchmen
Dutch sailors saw a fleet of ships in the air, with many people and soldiers.
Source: A report made before the harbormaster (Seville: Juan Gomez de Bias, 1652).

3

May 1652, Near Rome, Italy
Huge object drops strange matter
A single luminous object, 80 meters in size, was seen in the air. A mass of "gelatinous
matter" fell to the ground.
Source: Edinburgh Philosophical Journal I (October 1819): 234.

1656, Cardiganshire, Wales: Bedroom visitation
In a letter written in 1656, John Lewis of Cardiganshire (Wales) described the experience
of an acquaintance of his:
"A man lay in bed at night while his family were all fast asleep. Just after midnight
"he could perceive a light entering [his] little room." Suddenly a dozen or so little beings
"in the shape of men, and two or three women, with small children in their arms" walked
"The room seemed different somehow. It was illuminated, and appeared to be wider
than before. The beings began to dance around and tuck into a special feast, inviting the
witness to try the meat. This went on for four hours, and in the meantime, "he could
perceive no voice" except for the occasional whisper in Welsh "bidding him hold his
peace." He found it impossible to wake up his wife. Finally, the party of little spirits
moved their dancing on to another room, and then departed. Until the man cried out at last

and woke up his family, for some unexplained reason "he could not find the door, nor the
way into bed."
John Lewis described the man as "an honest poor husbandsman, and of good report:
and I made him believe I would put him to his oath for the truth of this relation, who was
very ready to take it."

Source: William E. A. Axon, Welsh Folk-lore of the Seventeenth Century. Y Cymmrodor
Vol. XXI (1908), 116.

1659, Leicester and Nottinghamshire, England
Flying coffin
Starting at 1 P.M. people observed an object "in the perfect figure and form of a black
coffin, with a fiery dart and a flaming sword flying to and again, backwards and forwards
the head of the said coffin, which was with great wonder and admiration beheld by man
hundreds of people." This was seen until 3:15 P.M., when it broke up with great brilliance.

Fig. 22: Wonders in England
Source: The five strange wonders, in the north and west of England as they were
communicated to divers honourable members of Parliament, from several countrey
gentlemen and ministers, concerning the strange and prodigious flying in the air of a
black coffin betwixt Leicester and Nottingham, on Sabbath day last a fortnight, with a
flaming arrow, and a bloody sword, casting forth firearms of fire... (London: W. Thomas,
1659).
1660, New England, American Colonies
Aerial phenomena to the rescue of Puritanism

Some remarkable phenomena having appeared in the air, one of which is described as
"resembling the form of a spear, of which the point was directed towards the setting sun,
and which, with slow majestic motion, descended through the upper regions of the air, and
gradually disappeared beneath the horizon," (note: possibly the zodiacal light) the
magistrates and clergy availed themselves of the deep impression which these signs
created, to promote a general reformation of manners among the people.
For this purpose, they published a catalogue of the principal vices of the times, in
which were enumerated "a neglect of the education of children, pride displayed in the
manner of cutting and curling the hair, excess of finery, immodesty of apparel, negligent
carriage at church, failure in due respect to parents, profane swearing, idleness, and
frequenting of taverns, and a sordid eagerness of shopkeepers to obtain high prices."

Source: James Silk Buckingham, America, historical statistic, and descriptive (London:
Fisher, Son & co., 1841), 259.

14 March 1660, London (Westminster) England
Peculiar cloud
Boat passengers saw a dark, then bright cloud dropping fire over Westminster. About 8
P.M. they observed "a white bright cloud which gave such a light that they could plainly
see the windows of the Parliament House, and people walking to and fro upon
Westminster Bridge".
The cloud was seen to "drop down fire several times upon Westminster Hall and then
it removed and (flew) over the Parliament Hall and did drop down fire upon that also
several times".
155

Source: Eniaytos terastios Mirabilis annus, or, The year of prodigies and wonders being a
faithful and impartial collection ofseverall signs that have been seen in the heavens, in
the earth, and in the waters; together with many remarkable accidents, and judgements
befalling divers persons, according as they have been testified by very credible hands: all
which have happened within the space of one year last past, and are now made publick for
a seasonable warning to the people of these three kingdoms speedily to repent and turn to
the Lord, whose hand is lifted up amongst us (London, 1661).
August 1660, Statford Row, near London, England
A Great ship in the air
The likeness of a "great ship" was seen in the air. It decreased in size and eventually
disappeared.
The worthy chronicler does not fail to inform us that "this is testified by an able
Minister living not far from the place, who received the information from the spectators
themselves".

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661)
September 1660, London, England
Multiple unknown lights

"A gentleman of good quality and an Officer of Eminency in the late King's army and
now a Justice of the Peace in the Country" reported seeing a bright light in the Southwest,
along with six smaller ones. "Whilst he with several others, were with some admiration
beholding them, they all fell down perpendicularly and vanished."

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
3 October 1660, Hull, England
Large tapered flying object
The soldiers on guard at the South Blockhouse saw a large fiery object tapering off at one
end and leaving a narrow stream behind. It was so brilliant that they could read fine print
or take up a pin from the ground by its light. This object was in sight for half an hour.
Someone who was approaching Hull that same night, coming from Lincolnshire,
confirmed the first report: "He saw a very great light in the sky, whereby he could
perfectly discern his way, though it was exceedingly dark."
The whole relation-continues our chronicler-" is signified by letters from several
eminent men in Hull who spoke with the eyewitnesses, as also by some inhabitants of
London, who upon occasion have been at Hull since that time, and there from very good
hands have received credible information concerning the premises."

156

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).

11 October 1660, Hertford, England
Flying circle with appendages
A person of very good note and credit awoke at 4 A.M. to see "a flashing like fire against
his window, and fearing some house near him had been on fire, he immediately arose and
went to the window."
He saw a large object with a circle around it, and two appendages above and below it,
from which great flashes were indeed emitted. This object remained in view for several
hours, and was observed by others in the town.

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
12 October 1660, London, England: Two unknowns
Around 4 P.M. people saw an object going through the air from west to east with a great
noise.
It was shaped "like a beesome" according to witnesses. Immediately afterwards,
another object of the same shape, but smaller, flew overhead on the same trajectory.

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).

30 October 1660, Austy, England: Multiple objects
Several persons who were going to Ware Market suddenly saw a terrible flash of
lightning, after which the night became brighter and brighter, until a great fiery thing
appeared in the East and ascended. Three star-like objects fell from it vertically. The large
object changed to a crescent shape and remained in view until dawn.
The same thing was seen by five people going from Hertford to London: they saw the
flash of lightning, which was as bright as the noonday sun and made it seem that their
horses were on fire. One suspects a fireball or very bright meteor, but the story disproves
this hypothesis: "Within a little space, this Body of Fire rose up again into the Air, with a
tayl (sic) about a Pole long, and went Eastward, where at last it fixed itself in the sky like
a star".

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
30 October 1660, Yelden, England: Bright object
A bright object seen in the sky for two hours by a credible witness. The record reads:
"Very early was seen a great Star which.. .gave so great a light, that some inhabitants
here...could see to do business in the house by the light of it; one credible person here
beheld it two hours together, and at last saw it turn into the perfect form of a Roman S,
and then presently it divided in the middle, and one half went to the north-east, and the
other to the south-west, and so by degrees disappeared."

157

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
10 November 1660, Oxford, England: Humanoid
A scholar named Allen, of Magdalen College in Oxford, who was in bed, heard a noise
like the sound of geese. He got up and looked out of a window on the side of a bridge, but
saw nothing. As he went back to bed he saw a strange man at the door, apparently dressed
as a bishop!
"At first he was not much affrighted, but called to it and abjured it to speak. The
Bishop immediately rose up and approached towards his bed, at which the young man was
exceedingly terrified, and crying out murder, murder, it vanished. He since says that he
saw and heard something which he will discover to no one."

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
30 November 1660, Ilford, Essex, England
Dogfight in the sky
Very early in the morning two men saw a fiery cloud in the southwest. From under it
appeared two bright objects as large as the moon, which began a dogfight in the
atmosphere. One of them eventually grew dimmer while the other increased in size and

remained in view for two hours, "a great part of which time they saw streaming from it.
streams of fire and streams of blood." It then diminished until it was no larger than an
ordinary star.

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
1 Dec. 1660, Hounsditch, England: Unknown moon
At 5 A.M. an inhabitant of Hounsditch saw an unexplained, bright object the size of the
moon in the eastern sky.

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
1661, Goult, Vaucluse, France
A luminous figure heals a sick man

267.

Antoine de Nantes, a messenger from Goult, who was gravely ill, caught sight of a
marvelously beautiful child who hovered above a fiery halo. When this figure vanished,
the man found himself fully healed. A chapel was consecrated two years later and
"miracles became commonplace after that date."

Source: Louis Leroy, Histoire des pelerinages de la Sainte Vierge en France (Paris,
1873), 30.

February 1661, Darken, Surrey, England
Flying cathedrals
A "discreet sober gentleman" saw a strange cloud in the evening sky, and two objects he
compares to cathedrals or churches, "having upon it diverse goodly Pinnacles, and each of
them a long streamer flying upwards upon it, and as he beheld it, he thought it grew up to
a greater splendor and glory." The other object was darker.
After a while, the large one emitted puffs of vapor and disappeared, while the smaller
one grew and became brighter. The witness was called into his house and could not
observe the end of the phenomenon.

158

Source: Mirabilis Annus (1661).
20 March 1661, Canterbury, England
A Star with an opening
A very large "star" with an "opening" underneath, from which issued streams of fire was
seen for thirty minutes.

Source: MIRABILIS ANNUS SECUNDUS; or, a second year of prodigies. Being a true
and impartial collection of many strange signes and apparitions, which have this last year
been seen in the heavens, and in the earth, and in the waters. Together with many
remarkable accidents and judgements befalling divers persons, according to the most
exact information that could be procured from the best hands; and now published as a
warning to all men speedily to repent, and to prepare to meet the Lord, who gives us these
signs of his coming... (London, 1662).
April 1661, Chard, Somersetshire, England
Multiple Objects
Several witnesses saw a narrow, long dusty cloud from which three very bright spots
descended and joined.

Source: Mirabilis Annus Secundus (1662).
April 1661, Between Ilford and Romford, England
Maneuvering light
About 10 P.M. Captain Chelmford, of Ipswich, and another man riding to London saw a
fiery light with a green-white glow that changed direction. It approached at great speed,
emitting light beams. When it was exactly overhead it suddenly changed direction again

and disappeared at the horizon. Upon arriving in London, the two travelers had a notarial
deed drawn up, recording their experience.

Source: Mirabilis Annus Secundus (1662).
23 April 1661, Bednall-Green, England
Pillar containing lights
People saw a great pillar of fire with smaller objects (compared to "burning coals") within
it, and at 10 o'clock that night "several persons near Pickadilly saw strange fiery clouds
and other objects very terrible to the spectators, from some of whose mouths we received
the information".

159

Source: Mirabilis Annus Secundus (1662).
29 June 1661, Eastberry, Berkshire, England
Dark objects
The Sun was obscured by a great number of dark balls passing in front of it. Other objects
looked like crosses.

Source: Mirabilis Annus Secundus (1662).

October 1661, Bristol, England: Figures in a "cloud"
A cloud was seen rising out of the river. It opened up three times, revealing various
figures inside.

Source: Mirabilis Annus Secundus (1662).
April 1662, Tedworth, Wiltshire, England
The humanoid threat?
Numerous incidents of bedroom visitations, knocks and reports of witness paralysis by
lights and humanoid entities.

Source: Rev. Joseph Glanvill, Saducismus Triumphatus (1681).

11 May 1662, near Salt Ash, Cornwall, England
A great star and a black square object

At St. Stephens near Salt Ash, a "very great star" was reported, with the likeness of two
red "legs" and a black square object. The star moved to and fro.

Source: Mirabilis Annus Secundus (1662).
Late July 1663, Saint Martin, Brittany, France
Flying red cross
In the parish of Saint-Martin, near Quimper, a man named Frangois Carre, from Bodeau,
saw a red cross in the sky. It seemed to fly away from Saint Martin church and headed
towards the chapel of Saint Michel.
Jerome de Lestour, a priest in Caudan in the diocese of Vannes, reports that "fearing
to be the victim of an illusion, Carre called his wife without saying anything else than to
look in the same direction. 'Do you see anything?' he asked. 'Yes, a red cross heading
towards the chapel of Saint-Michel,' she answered."

Source: The diary of Jesuit Father Julien Maunoir, written in 1672, kept in the library of

the Society of Jesus in Rome. Translation of this passage is by Yannis Deliyannis.

15 August 1663, Roboziero near Bieloziero, Russia
Fiery object with burning beams

Farmer Levko Federov and others saw a fiery object estimated at 40 meters in diameter,
with burning beams. It returned one hour later. A formal report from Saint Cyrille
monastery reads:
"To His Highness the Archimandrite Nikita, to His Eminence the Starets Paul, to thtffr
Highnesses the Starets of St. Cyril Monastery, Most Venerable lords, salutations from
your humble servant Ivachko Rievskoi.
"The farmer Lievko Fiedorov, from the village of Mys of Antusheva of your
monastery estate Losy, has related to me the following facts: On this Saturday, the 15th
day of August of the year 7171 (that is 7171 year of old style or 1663 of modern style), the
faithful from the district of Bieloziero, Robozierskaya volost, had assembled in great
number in the church of the village of Roboziero, in the present holyday of Assumption of
the Virgin Mary.
"While they were inside, a great sound arose in the heavens and numerous people
came out of God's house to watch it from the square. There, Lievko Fiedorov, the farmer
in question, was among them and witnessed what follows which for him was a sign from
God. At noon, a large ball of fire came down over Roboziero, arriving from the clearest
part of the cloudless heavens. It came from the direction whence winter comes, and it
moved toward midday (south) along the lake passing over water surface. The ball of fire
measured some 140 ft. from one edge to the other and over the same distance, ahead of it,
two ardent rays extended. The people seeing the terror of God gathered in the church and
prayed to God and the Blessed Virgin, with tears and crying, and the big fire and two
smaller ones disappeared.
"Less than an hour later, the people again came out to the square and the same fire
suddenly reappeared over the same lake, from the same place where it first disappeared. It
darted from the south to the west and must have been 1500 ft. away when it disappeared.
But it appeared, in a short while, back again, from that another place, moving this time to
the west; the third time the same fire ball appeared more terrific in width, and disappeared

having moved to the west and it had been remaining over Roboziero, over water, for an
hour and a half. And the length of the lake is about 7000 ft., and the width is 3500 ft.
"As the fire ball was coming over water, peasants who were in their boat on the lake,
followed it, and the fire burned them by the heat not allowing them to get closer. The
waters of the lake were illuminated to their greatest depth of 30ft and the fish swam away
to the shore, they all saw that. And where the fire ball came the water seemed to be
covered with rust under the reddish light; it was then scattered by the wind and the water
became clean again.
"And I, your humble servant, sent a message to the priests in Robozierskya district,
exactly for this reason, and they responded to me with a letter confirming that they had
such sign in that day. And you, most Venerable lords, would know about this. And this
Robozierskaya district is about 6 miles away from Antusheva village of your monastery
estate Losa."

February 1665, Vienna, Austria: Flying box-like object
An object resembling a coffin was seen in the air, causing much anxiety.
Source: Walter G. Bell, The Great Plague in London in 1665 (New York: Dodd, Mead &
Co., 1924).

1

8 April 1665, Stralsund, Germany: Domed flying saucer
Aerial ships and a saucer-shaped object with dome were reported flying over the church of
this town located near the Baltic Sea, and hovered there till evening. Witnesses were left
trembling, with pain in their head and limbs. The case is described in researcher Illobrand
Von Ludwiger's book Best UFO Cases - Europe published by the National Institute for
Discovery Science in 1998.

Fig. 23: The Stralsund phenomenon
Several fishermen first reported seeing a big swarm of starling birds flying in the sky
about 2 P.M., coming from the north over the sea. They changed to battle ships fighting
one another. A lot of smoke developed. New ships kept appearing, small and big ones, and
the battle lasted for a few hours. Once the initial vision had vanished, the scenario
changed. Writer Erasmus Francisci (whose real name was Erasmus Finx) describes the
scene:
"After a while out of the sky came a flat round form, like a plate, looking like a big
man's hat...Its color was that of the rising moon, and it hovered right over the church of
St. Nicolai. There it remained stationary till evening. The fishermen, worried to death,
didn't want to look further at the spectacle and buried their faces in their hands. On the
following days they fell sick with trembling all over and pain in head and limbs. Many
scholarly people thought a lot about that."
The Berliner Ordinari und Postzeitungen also wrote about the vision: "One of these
fishermen had been sick on his feet. All of the citizens who have observed this are
reliable. Yesterday, Herr Colonel von der Wegck and Docter Gessman interrogated two of
the 6 fishermen. May God change this miracle for the best."
German researcher Von Ludwiger adds: "What the fishermen saw was a plate with a
dome (man's hat) orange in color (like the rising moon) which hovered motionless for a
long time and acted on the witnesses as if they became sick from strong radiation. (...)
Erasmus Francisci hesitated to believe this account, because he could not find a suitable
explanation: 'I read it at that time in the usual printed newspaper. But, to tell the truth, I
didn't believe in that story, and I thought the fishermen had fished it out of the air or from
a deceived imagination....'"
Francisci reported this account because between 1665 and 1680 several battles took
place between the Swedes and the Prussians, and the spectacle could be given the meaning
162

of a sign for an imminent war. Francisci states (p. 625): "After the sea was colored with so
much blood after that time, the affair now seems to me believable. What the disk-like
thing means to the good city shouldn't be hard to guess, if one remembers how the tower
of St. Nicolai Church was destroyed in 1670 during wartime....'"

Fig. 24: "Der Wunder-Reiche"

There is no question that the account is authentic, although the date may be incorrect
by a few days. The title page of Francisi's book is given on the next page, as preserved in
Berlin's Staatsbibliothek. The authors are indebted to researchers Yannis Deliyannis and
Isaac Koi for tracking down important details of the case. After publication of von
Ludwiger's book, some skeptics argued the observation could be accounted for by a
mirage.
Source: Illobrand von Ludwiger, Best UFO Cases - Europe (Las Vegas, Nevada: Nations
Institute for Discovery Science, 1998), quoting Erasmus Francisci (1680), and Ordinari
und Postzeitungen (No. 65) of April 10th, 1665. He also quotes from E. Buchner, Medi&ft
Hexen, Geisterseher (16 Bis 18 JH), 42-43 (Munich: Albert Langen, 1926); Francisci,

Erasmus. Der xvunder-reiche Ueberzug unserer Nider- Welt/Order Erd-umgebende
(Nurnberg, 1680).

26 May 1666, Tokyo (Edo), Japan: Flying figure
A mysterious light "20 feet long" shaped like a man flew towards the East. This is another
example of a tantalizing report from Asia, about which we need more detailed
information.

Source: Morihiro Saito, The Messenger from Space.

20 January 1667, Gjov, Faeroe Islands
Luminous visitor
Jacob Olsen, 24, was awakened by a luminous visitor who healed him. He saw him again
later, coming from the sky.
Source: Jacobsen Debes, Faeroae & Faeroa Reserata (1673).

15 November 1667, Mittelfischach, Germany
Sign of wonder
An engraving preserves the sighting of a "terrible sign of wonder" that took place during
sunrise, and was seen for several hours in the sky over the town of Mittelfischach.
The image shows the sun shining through a break in the clouds while a group of
people watch a formation of round lights. There is a scene of battle in the sky, and three
crosses among dark nebulosities. The village is shown in detail to the left, with its church
and a few houses.

Source: Abriss des Erschrecklichen wunderzeichens, so sich den 15. Novembr. 1667 beim
dorff Mittelfischach am Firmament des Himmels bey auff gehender Sonn etlich stunden
lang sehen lassen. [s.l.] (1667). [Goethe Universitatsbibliothek Frankfurt-am-Main,
Einblattdr. G.Fr. 11]

Fig. 25: Mittelfischach phenomenon
Late December 1667, Bayarcal, Spain
Procession of lights
Bayarcal was a focus of attention for the inquisition. Among many testimonies relating to
strange lights was that of Juan Munoz, a tailor from Santander. In his sworn statement he
said that in 1667, around Christmas time, at midnight, he saw a cross, behind which there
was a banner, followed by four lights like wicks that flashed on and off. He supposed it to
be the priest carrying the Viaticum (the Christian Eucharist given to a person in danger of
death), though it seemed to be too bright.
As the lights moved, and he was also walking home, he reached a point some fifteen
steps from them. He arrived home, quite anxious about what he had seen, but before
closing the door he turned around to take another look. He then saw the lights pass in front
on the church. Too frightened to investigate what the luminous thing was, he shut the door
164

and swore he wouldn't even tell anyone about what he had seen. However, when he heard
other neighbors relate they had seen the phenomenon, he told them what he had witnessed.
They all agreed that such things had been seen many times before, and that the only
possible explanation was that God sent them as signs to commemorate the lives of martyrs
from the area.
The fact that Munoz was new to the village and had never heard of the phenomenon
was taken as proof that such things were not a mere figment of the imagination.
Processions of lights were seen in many Spanish villages, and in other European
countries. Sometimes they would be seen over the rooftops, but usually at ground level,
and could range in size from tiny to several meters across.

Source: Francisco A. Hitos, Martires de la Alpujarra en la Rebelion de los Moriscos
(1568). Republished by Apostolado de la Prensa, Madrid (1935).

April 1670, countryside near London, England
Jane Lead's contact
An English woman named Jane Lead has her first contact with a bright cloud with a
brilliant woman inside. Jane Lead was a British Christian mystic who lived from 1623 to
1704. Information about her early life is sparse but her family is known to have hailed
from Norfolk. Born as Jane Ward in 1623, she married William Lead (or Leade) at the age
of 21, and had four daughters by him.

According to her own writings, during a dance at a Christmas party, when she was 15
years old, Lead heard a miraculous disembodied voice. It said "Cease from this, I have
another dance to lead thee in, for this is vanity." She interpreted this as a sign that she
should devote her life to a spiritual cause, and in later life this decision led her into the
study of theology, philosophy and alchemy.
In April 1670, as Lead reflected about the nature of Wisdom,
There came upon me an overshadowing bright Cloud, and in the midst of it the
Figure of a Woman, most richly adorned with transparent Gold, her hair hanging
down and her Face as the terrible Crystal for brightness, but her Countenance
was sweet and mild. At which sight I was somewhat amazed...

165

From this moment on, Jane Lead's life would be full of visions. Years later she would
write about actual sightings that she had and several abductions by a group of beings who,
by her own admission, were neither angels nor demons. (As noted by Jesse Glass in an
article on Jane Lead's mystic experiences, she often uses the term 'Magia' when referring
to them). She calls her abduction experiences Transports throughout her diaries.
Source: Works of Jane Lead, especially her book A Fountain of Gardens. "Printed and
Sold by J. Bradford, near Crowder's Wall," London 1696. Four Volumes. The original
edition is very rare but most of Jane Lead's works can be found faithfully reproduced in
on-line archives.

18 August 1671, Regensburg, Germany
Signs in the clouds
Signs in the sky: An engraving shows an amazed crowd staring at ships in the sky, various
mythical animals and armies arrayed for battle. This engraving is cut from a book, The
Relationis historicae semestralis vernalis continuatio (1672 edition) by Jacobus Francus
and Sigismundus Latomus.

Fig. 26: Regensburg phenomenon
Source: Wunderzeichen, zu Regenspurg gesehen am 18. Augusti 1671. [Goethe
Universitatsbibliothek Frankfurt-am-Main, Einblattdr. G.Fr. 12], engraving cut from
Francus, Jacobus & Latomus, Sigismundus. Relationis historicae semestralis vernalis

continuatio (1672). University of Frankfurt, Collection of Gustav Freytag (Einblattdr.
G.Fr. 12).

25 January 1672, Paris Observatory, France
Unknown planetoid orbiting Venus
The great astronomer and planetary observer Giovanni Domenico Cassini, who was
director of Paris Observatory at the time, recorded the presence of an object that seemed to
be a satellite of Venus. He would not announce this discovery until he saw the object
again, in 1686.
This supposed satellite was later named "Neith."
Source: "The Problematical Satellite of Venus," in The Observatory 1 (1884): 222-226.

8 February 1672, off Cherbourg, France
Triple sky ships
Captain Isaac Guiton reports that a "star" came down; it split into two "ships", while a
third one appeared later. The original reads: "An hour past midday, by the calmest weather
in the world, appeared to us a star over our heads, about fifteen feet long. From there it
went and fell to the north, leaving some smoke that formed into two ships, each with two
lights and the mizzen and their large sails folded, both sailing into the south. The one on

the north side was larger than the southernmost one. And as they sailed thus, they
separated by about four feet, and another ship formed in the middle, seemingly bigger than
the others, all black, and turning its bow to the north without any sails, yet equipped with
its masts and ropes, as if resting at anchor. This seemed to us to take over half an hour.
After which, they vanished to the south without leaving any trace..."
Source: Cited by Michel Bougard in La chronique des OVNI {1977), 96.

16 November 1672, Tokyo, Japan
Flying lantern
An object resembling a lantern flew away to the east.

Source: Takao Ikeda, UFOs over Japan.

1674, Japan, exact location unknown
Fast flying "dark cloud"
A dark, elongated cloud flies "like an arrow," on a N to SE trajectory. By definition,
meteors are luminous, often described as "fiery." The description given here, of a dark
object, seems to exclude the meteoritic explanation.

Source: Brothers Magazine \, 1, no original source quoted.

23 May 1676, London, England: Bedroom visitation
In a diary entry, spiritual writer Jane Lead describes a visit from three mysterious figures.
"I saw one as in a Figure of a sprightly Youth, presenting himself near my Bedside,
which amazed me, and I was afraid to take knowledge of him, who made out to me, as if
he would draw my Aspect to him, but I could not find any Power for Speech with him.
This disappearing, another in taller Stature, and more Manly Countenance, drew upon me,
seeming to desire Familiarity with me; and then I looked when this Appearance would
have spoke, but it was passive, and silent, only pleasant in its Countenance, who on a
sudden withdrew. Then again was a presentation of a Person in a middle Stature, comely,
sweet, and amiable for attraction; yet I being bounded in my Spirit, was hindered:
otherwise I could have run with my Spirit into him."
While this apparition could be interpreted as an effect of schizophrenia this report
would be seen as classic "bedroom visitation" by aliens in the context of today's
abduction literature.
167

Source: The Works of Jane Lead, op. cit.

16 July 1676, London, England
Fiery object, a globe of light
Spiritual writer Jane Lead witnessed an object in the sky that she took to be "the eye of
God." She wrote "This Morning...there appeared to me an Azure blue Firmament, so
Oriental as nothing of this, in this Visible Orb could parallel with it. Out of the midst
hereof was a most wonderful Eye, which I saw Sparkling, as with Flaming Streams from
it. Which I am not able to Figure out, after that manner, in which it did present it self unto
me. But according to this Form it was, as much as I am able to give an account of it, it was
thus, or after this manner. There was a Flaming Eye in the midst of a Circle, and round
about it a Rainbow with all variety of Colours, and beyond the Rainbow in the Firmament,
innumerable Stars all attending this Flaming Eye."
Jane's style is as difficult and archaic as that of any 17 century mystic, but what she
seems to be describing is a luminous or fiery ("sparkling...flaming") lenticular ("eyeshaped") object that flew over London on a sunny day ("the blue firmament"). The object
emitted rays or jets ("flaming streams") and seemed to move within a wider rainbowcolored circle, perhaps accompanied by smaller objects which looked like stars. Her
drawing shows an oval or eye-like thing emitting five shafts of flame or light, enclosed by
a thick circle surrounded by stars. The circle's interior is labeled "The Globe of Light,"
suggesting something more substantial than a mere 'ring' or 'rainbow.'
th

Fig. 27: Jane Lead's vision
Source: The Works of Jane Lead, op. cit.
20 Sept. 1676, Uffington Fields, England: Wavy dart
A fiery 'meteor' in the shape of a dart moved with a wavy vibrating motion. At 7 P.M.,
according to Morton, an "unusual meteor" was seen by residents of Northamptonshire.
Mr. Gibbon of Peterborough said that
"The stem at a distance appear'd about a foot and half in length and with a narrow
stream of light as if were a String of Cord affix'd to it. It had a wav'd or vibrated motion
Its duration about a minute."

Mr. Gibbon allegedly first saw this apparition at the zenith as it made its way toward
Uffington Fields.

Source: John Morton, The Natural History of Northamptonshire; with some account of the
antiquities (London, 1712), 348.

22 March 1677, London, England
Assaulted by unknown entities
Spiritual writer Jane Lead wrote that during the night she had been "cast as into a magical
Sleep, where I saw my self carried into a Wilderness." There she found herself in a
peaceful, natural environment. Before she could enjoy these circumstances, however, a
being that she had seen before and two other female entities "did make a kind of Assault
upon me; but one of the Females was more fierce, and did give my outward Skin a prick,
as with a sharp Needle. Upon which I called for Angelical aid to succour me, or else too
hard they would be. Whereupon I was parted from them, and saw them in that place no
more..."
Lead writes that after this vision, before waking up in bed, she was told that she
needn't worry, that it would not happen to her again.

Source: The Works of Jane Lead, op. cit.

30 December 1677, at sea West of Granada, Spain
Unknown "star"
Pierre Boutard, an officer aboard the ship La Maligne notes in the logbook that "on
Thursday the thirtieth day of December
1677 in the morningl about 4 hours, we have seen
l
a star in the direction of northwest A west, ending southeast A east, but carrying (such) a
great light that all on board thought there was widespread fire, but it was accompanied by
over 200 rays carrying such a light, that we believed we were all lost. We dropped anchor
about 9 or 10 in the morning in the small bay of Grenada."
Source: Michel Bougard, La chronique des OVNI( 1977), 97.

9 February 1678, London, England
Landing of a large ship
In a diary entry entitled A Transport, Jane Lead writes:
"In the Morning after I was awaked from Sleep, upon a sudden I was insensible of
any sensibility as relating to a corporeal Being, and found my self as without the clog of
an Earthly Body, being very sprightly and airy in a silent place, where some were beside
my self, but I did not know them by their Figures, except one, who went out, and came in
again: and there was no speaking one to another, but all did set in great silence."
Lead's ordeals could not be closer to the situation of a modern abductee: She is
woken up in a disoriented trance-like state, possibly confusing reality with a dream or a

recent half-forgotten memory; around her are 'figures' she does not know, except for one;
there is an eerie silence; next, Lead recalled seeing a gold-colored craft "come down" to
"a pretty distance" from where she was.
"It was in the form of a large Ship" with four golden wings. The ship "came down
with the greatest swiftness as is imaginable." She asked some of the figures beside her if
they could see what she could, and mysteriously they said they couldn't! No doubt
puzzled by their answer, Jane looked again and saw herself m front of the others, "leaping
and dancing and greatly rejoicing to meet it."
Bar the detail about a third-person view of herself when the ship landed, this is the
kind of account given by people whose cases fill countless UFO books today, and whose
stories are often taken at face value.
It is not sufficient to accuse abductees of confabulation and of sharing science-fiction

fantasies because the same 'fantasies' have been reported and believed for hundreds of

years, since long before the popularisation of the genre. Was Lead's vision a muddled
memory of an earlier experience?
Lead's diary entry of February 9 concludes: "But when I came up to it [the Ship],
then it did as suddenly go up again, withdrawing out of sight, unto the high Orb from
whence it came. After which I found my self in my Body of sense, as knowing I had been
ranging in my Spirit from it for a while, that I might behold this great thing."
th

Source: The Works of Jane Lead, op.cit.

17 September 1680, Lisbon, Portugal
Landing of a hairy occupant
A large black cloud-like mass landed in a field, releasing a huge hair-covered being that
appeared - and disappeared.
Source: A photocopy of the pamphlet, written by Julio Alberto de la Hinojosa, was

reproduced in its entirety in Fenomenos Celestes en el Pasado: Siglos VIII al XIX,
published by the Centra de Estudios Interplanetarios, Barcelona, 1995.

17 November 1684, Saint Aubin, Brittany, France
Tear-shaped object
About 10 A.M. a priest from Lannion saw "a flame in the shape of a teardrop, as big as
one's hand, coming down from the sky. Its motion was extremely slow, for it took no less
than seven to eight minutes to reach the horizon. It seemed a bit bluer. Its tail threw off
sparks, and it was on the opposite side from the sun."

Source: Histoire de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (1684), 419.

9 July 1686, Leipzig, Germany
Unknown astronomical object
About 1:20 A.M. a brilliant object, half the apparent size of the Moon, was observed
hovering for a full 15 minutes. The observer was "the late Mr. Gottfried Kirch, for many
years a diligent observer of the heavens, perfectly well instructed in astronomical
matters," according to Rev. Edward Polehamton, who notes:
"A fire ball with a tail was observed, in 8 V2 quarter degrees of Aquarius and 4
degrees north, which continued immoveable for half a quarter of an hour, having a
diameter equal to half the moon's diameter. At first, the light was so great that we could
see to read by it; after which, it gradually vanished in its place. This phenomenon was
observed at the same time in several other places; especially at Schmitza, a town distant
from Dantzig eleven German miles, towards the south, its altitude being about 6 degrees
above the southern horizon.... Whence, by easy calculus, it will be found, that the same
was not less than sixteen German miles distant in a right line from Leipsic, and above 6 V2
such miles perpendicular above the horizon, that is at least thirty English miles high in the

air. And though the observer says of it, immotus perstititper semi-quandrantem horae, it

is not to be understood that it keeps its place like a fixed star, all the time of its
appearance; but that it had no very remarkable progressive motion. For he himself has, at
the end of the said Ephemerides, given a figure of it, whence it appears that it darted
obliquely to the right-hand, and where it ended, left two globules or nodes, not visible but
by an optic tube."
Source: Gotfried Kirch, Ephemerides (contained as an appendix to the ephemeride for the
year 1688). Quoted by E. Polehamton in The Gallery of Nature and Art, or a Tour through

Creation and Science (1815).

28 August 1686, Paris Observatory, France
Mystery planetoid near Venus
A second observation by Cassini of the supposed satellite of Venus, which would later be
named "Neith." Venus was a morning "star" at the ltime, with heliocentric longitude 59°
and elongation 38°. The object was estimated to be A the diameter of Venus and it
showed the same phase as Venus. Cassini then revealed his two sightings.
Source: "The Problematical Satellite of Venus," in The Observatory 7 (1884): 222-226.

Circa June 1688, Yunan Province, China
Flying umbrella
A large yellow "umbrella-like" object rose from the ridge and came down again, with
many lights:
"In the year 27 under the reign of emperor Kangxi of the Qing dynasty, my brotherin-law Bixilin went to his home in the mountains, 20 kilometers from the city of Kunmin.
While staying there, he saw every day at noon, when the weather was clear, a large yellow
cover like an umbrella that rose slowly above a ridge. This object threw such brilliant
lights that he dared not look at it directly. It rose and got lost into the clouds. A little while
later it would come down, always slowly, going up and down in the same way. At
nightfall, the flying object lost its yellow color and turned paler and blurry. It disappeared
completely when the sky was dark."

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 36.

20 December 1689, England, exact location unknown
Strange object
About 4:45 A.M., a fiery object shaped like a half-moon changed into a bright sword and
"ran westward."
Source: "Diary of Jacob Bee of Durham," reprinted in Six North Country Diaries, vol.
CXVIII, J.C. Hodgson, ed. (Durham: Surtees Society, 1910).

6 May 1692, Edo (Tokyo), Japan: Three unknowns
In broad daylight, three luminous objects like the sun, moon and a star appeared, sparkling
"in an unearthly way."

Source: Inforespace 25.

1693, Hamburg, Germany: Round machine CD
A very luminous, round "machine" with a sphere at its center, crossing the sky.
Source: Researcher Winkler (in a catalogue published by the Fund for UFO Research)
cites Peter Kolosimo. Unfortunately we have no specific reference for this case, which
could refer to an ordinary meteor. There could also be some confusion with case 310
below.

Sept. 1693, Bowden Parva, Northampton, England
Unknown, complex object
"The top of it was in Form of the letter W: And had a Lift or String of Light appendant to
the lower Part of the W, about a Yard and Half in Length. It continued some time, and was
seen by several round the country."
Source: John Morton, Natural History, op. cit.

December 1693, Egryn, Merionethshire, Wales
Unexplained fiery phenomenon

A "fiery exhalation" came from the sea and set fire to the hay with "a blue weak flame."
The fire, though easily extinguished, "did not the least harm to any of the men who
interposed their endeavour to save the hay, though they ventured (perceiving it different
from common fire) not only close to it, but sometimes into it."
Source: The oldest report comes from a letter dated January 20th, 1694 by a certain
Maurice Jones to the author of the additions to Cambden 's Brittania. The letter was
published in The Philosophical Transactions, vol. XVIII (1694), pp. 49-50, along with a
chronology and names of witnesses of the events.

23 July 1694, London, England
Figures moving within a fiery circle
Jane Lead describes something she calls an "enclosed Principle" surrounded by a fiery
circle:
Within it there appeared bright Beryl Bodies walking up and down, and with
them did appear as in a Looking glass, like as a round Globe, the Personal Glory
of our Mighty King, who moved as they moved. The Ground they went upon,
was paved as with Sparkling Stones, with Veins of Gold, which cast forth a
mighty Lustre.

Source: The Works of Jane Lead, op. cit.

25 November 1696, Tobolsk, Russia
Human form in the sky
An object split into four luminous parts, the center being dark, with a human form inside.
The report reads: "On Sunday, at 2 P.M., there appeared in Tobolsk a sign in the sun: it
split into four parts, as it were, and the rays from the sun were light, but in the middle it
was dark. And among these parts one could see in the darkness something like a man with
extended arms."

Source: Cherepanov, Aerial Fears of Tobolsk in Olden Days-from the Siberian Olden
Days. (Tobolsk, 1882). Quoted in Zvesdochtets (Moscow, 1990), 214-215.

173

28 November 1696, Tobolsk, Russia
Double object descending
At 5 A.M. "there was a sign in the east: from a dark cloud there was suspended something
like an iron-clamp with a great fire that shone brightly and descended down to the very
earth."

Source: Cherepanov, Aerial Fears of Tobolsk in Olden Days - from the Siberian Olden
Days (Tobolsk, 1882), op. cit.

286.

4 November 1697, Mecklenburg & Hamburg, Germany
Two wheels in the sky
Two enormous, glowing wheels are shown in a picture with crowds watching the sky.
This was primarily seen between 6 and 7 P.M.: "A great fiery ball in the shape of a cannon
ball was seen floating.. .which phenomenon or air sign also above the horizon of Hamburg
at the same time but below was seen floating a cross shape..." After a quarter of an hour
the ball emitted a bang. It then "disappeared from the sight of many thousands of
spectators." After the same delay the cross-shape, described as having "a sulfur-gleaming,
bright shining terrible lightning" also departed.

Fig. 28: Mecklenburg phenomenon

1699, St. Didier, Vaucluse, near Avignon, France
Merging globes in the sky
A priest saw a large light and three globes coming from the sky and merging together: "As
I arrived near the oratory I saw the sky open, a great light appeared and soon I observed
three globes of fire. The middle one was higher than the other two. I thought, 'here are the
lights I have been told about.' Immediately I fell to my knees and thanked God for such a
great marvel. At the same time, two more lights appeared, but a bit higher than the place
where the chapel is located (...) The two globes merged with the middle one and
vanished."
Source: L 'histoire du diocese d'Avignon by Abbot Granget, cited by Michel Bougard, La

chronique des OVNI (1977), 99-100.

Epilogue to Part I-D

174

From the scientific observations of several astronomers to the visions of Jane Lead, the
17th century is especially interesting to a researcher of unusual aerial phenomena because
it gives us a complete template by which to parse the claims and sightings of today's
witnesses.
This section of our Chronology records stories of abductions by little people
(interpreted as "fairies" in Celtic countries, but similar in stature and behavior to today's
Aliens) as well as reports of partial paralysis and occasional healing powers among
humans exposed to these phenomena. Such enigmas continued to be seen in the light of
theology, to the grave detriment of poor witnesses accused of commerce with demons, but
a new philosophical movement would soon remove the old religious backdrop in favor of
a revolutionary, "experimental" mode of thinking.
The observations recorded in Mirabilis Annus, an important document we have
quoted on several occasions, provide a good illustration of the context of the prodigies and
their interpretation for political or religious purposes. In his thoughtful analysis (An Age of

Wonders, Prodigies, Politics and Providence in England 1657-1727, Manchester

University Press, Manchester and New York, 2002, 27-30) William E. Burns notes:
Mirabilis Annus made clear its political point very early on. Rather than merely
adducing specific prodigies to demonstrate divine displeasure, it adopted an

apocalyptic tactic of delegitimizing the regime through the sheer quantity of
prodigies alleged to have taken place in the preceding 'Year of Wonders'
Whatever the physical nature of the unexplained objects that triggered the sightings, then
interpretation allowed critics of the regime to vent their opposition:
The prodigies that Mirabilis Annus actually recounted, which divided into the
four categories of prodigies of air, fire, earth and water, and judgments on
particular individuals, continued to undermine the regime's legitimacy by
depicting it as sinful and weak. One prominent technique for this was the use of
historical parallels.
Aerial phenomena were also used as symbols of desired events, historical changes that the
compiler of the changes wished to see happen. Again, in the words of Burns:
Mirabilis Annus claimed that a Surrey gentleman had a vision of a glorious
cathedral in the sky beside a small church with a star inside it. The cathedral
vanished, while the small church, whose star suggests the glory of God, was
exalted. This symbolically represented the hope of dissenters that the Church of
England would be overthrown and that the small gathered churches of the
dissenters would triumph over it. Even less subtle was the appearance of a black
cloud dropping fire over Westminster Palace and the Parliament House.
We are left with the fact that the interpretation of the reported events is generally
biased by the writer who recounts the cases, but that may be the price we have to pay for

obtaining any knowledge of the underlying phenomena in the first place. As to the actual
explanation for the sightings, it is left for us to discover.
Early in the 17 century Descartes and Pascal in France, and Francis Bacon in
England, had already introduced new methods of inquiry into the order of nature. By the
end of the period people were beginning to think in new ways, inspired by the progress of
science based on observation.
The Age of Reason was imminent: in 1703 Isaac Newton would be elected President
of the Royal Society; in 1705 Edmund Halley would predict that the comet last seen in
1682 would return in 1758 (it did) and in 1707 French inventor Denis Papin would invent
the high-pressure boiler that would lead to the first steam-powered ship and would pave
the way to James Watt's steam engine and the industrial revolution.
The new impetus in science in the closing years of the seventeenth century parallels a
worldwide evolution in classical literature, in education and in the arts. When the year
1700 comes around, there are literate people everywhere who are eager to read intelligent
reports of new ideas and discoveries. Magazines circulate throughout Europe and
America; new journals are born. Naturally, reports of unusual aerial phenomena continue
to thrive in this new enlightened culture. They are now reported in the pages of wellth

edited periodicals like the Gentleman's Magazine, the Annual Register or the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal society of London, "giving some account of the
present undertakings, studies, and labours of the ingenious in many considerable parts of
the world. "

As we shall see, these "undertakings and labours" often had to do with an attempt by
"the ingenious" to understand phenomena that were beyond the physics of the time - and
still present us with a most interesting challenge today.

PART I-E
Eighteenth-Century Chronology
Often called "The Century of Enlightenment," the eighteenth century is characterized by
intense interest for the rational study of nature, systematic investigation of "meteors," the
rise of an international community of scientists and "natural philosophers," experiments
with electricity, Benjamin Franklin's demonstrations of the nature of lightning, the wide
development of navigation, the worldwide recognition and imitation of the Royal Society,
and early attempts to fly culminating in the first manned balloons.
The search for new planets gave rise to numerous observations of unknown bodies by
competent astronomers, both professionals and amateurs, eagerly reported in considerable
detail in the pages of the new scientific journals and publications dedicated to an
enlightened elite.
The eighteenth century belonged to Newton and Lavoisier, to the triumph of Reason.
Unlike modern "rationalists," however, intellectuals who considered themselves
enlightened were dedicated to careful observation of nature and did not recoil before its
more mysterious aspects. On the contrary, unusual aerial phenomena were carefully
documented, published and commented upon with an openness of mind that is sorely
lacking in our "modern" era of institutionalized science.

August 1700, Sahalahti, Eastern Finland
Abducted by a disk
An old man, a smith named Tiittu, is said by a local story to have disappeared shortly after
a flying disk hovered over the village. His son went to search for him, and met a being he
perceived as a "bear" who said he had flown off.
"After Tiittu had gone to the forest, the same day villagers saw a huge disc hovering
above the village. It stayed without moving for a moment, then started to fly out to the
direction where Tiittu had gone to. Villagers believed that it was a mark of the end of the
world. They were horrified.
"For two days they stayed inside praying, singing religious songs and confessing their
sins. Only in the third day they were calm enough to go back to their normal work. When
Tiittu didn't return, the villagers started to look for him. In the forest Tiittus son suddenly
met a big being looking like a bear. The being started to speak in Finnish: 'Don't be
afraid. I can tell you that you are looking for your father in vain. You saw that 'sky ship'
like a rainbow—it took your father up to the heights, to another, better world, where lives
a race much higher than your people. Your father feels good there and doesn't miss his
home.' The bear disappeared, and they stopped looking for Tiittu.
"All the people of Sahalahti were talking about the mysterious case. Then they got a
new priest, who announced in the church: "This story speaks of sinful witchcraft, and it
represents the imagination of drunken and mad people, so youd better forget it."
178

Source: Finnish researcher, Tapani Kuningas, published this story in the Finnish magazine

Vimana (No. 3-4, 1967) and later in his book Ufoja Suomen taivaalla (Kirjayhtyma,

Helsinki, 1970). He claimed the story was a local tradition in Sahalahti, in East Finland.
However, no confirmation for this exists except for a single letter, which is now lost.

1701, Cape Passaro, Sicily, Italy: Hovering light
Witness C. De Corbin reports observing a very bright light in the sky, hovering for two
hours in spite of a strong wind.

Source: Abbe J. Richard, Histoire Naturelle del'Air et des Meteores (1771).
September 1702, Japan, exact location unknown
Red residue from a sun-like object
An object like a red sun was seen in the sky, dropping cotton-like filaments.

Source: Brothers Magazine 1,1.

1704, Hamburg, Germany: Sparkling flying boats
People saw the sky "crisscrossed with sparkling boat-like objects" chasing one another,
blending and separating, multiplying in plain view. We have too little information to
conclude they saw an aurora borealis.
Source: Yves Naud, UFOs and Extraterrestrials in History (Geneva: Ferni, 1978), vol. II,
176.

28 October 1707, Hidaka County, Wakayama, Japan
White light
During a tsunami that struck the coast, a luminous object like a white ball appeared in the
waves.
Source: Takao Ikeda, Nihon nu ufo (Tokyo: Tairiku shobo, 1974).

18 December 1707, Southern coast of England
Huge cylinder

A huge cylinder and an odd cloud moved along with nocturnal lights, low on the horizort?
The phenomenon was described by "the Worshipful Charles Kirkham, Esq." as "a long
dark Cloud of a Cylindrical Figure which lay horizontally, and seemed to divide the
Brightness into two almost Equal Parts. It had little or no motion, tho' the Wind blow'd
brisk. But on a sudden there appear'd a swelling Brightness in that Cylindric Cloud, which
broke out into Flames of a pale-coloured Fire."
The flames lasted less than half a minute, with "the Cloud from whence they
proceeded still keeping its first Position, and not diminish'd. It was wonderfully frightful
and amazing."
9

Source: Rev. John Morton, Natural History of Northamptonshire (1712), 349-350.

11 May 1710, London, England: Man in a flying object
At 2:00 A.M. multiple witnesses saw "a strange comet" which seemed to be carried along
with two black clouds. "After which," according to the report, "follow'd the likeness of a
Man in a Cloud of Fire, with a Sword in his Hand, which mov'd with the Clouds as the
other did, but they saw it for near a quarter of an Hour together, to their very great
surprise..." The scene was depicted in a woodcut.

Fig. 29: Sighting by nightwatchmen in London
Source: The Age of Wonders: or farther and particular Discriptton [sic] of the remarkable,
and Fiery Appartion [sic] that was seen in the Air, on Thursday in the Morning, being May
the 11th 1710. also the Figure of a Man in the Clouds with a drawn Sword; which pass 'd
from the North West over toward France, with reasonable Signification thereon; and the
Names of several Inhabitants in and about the City of London, that saw the same, and are
ready to Attest it. Also an Account of several Comets that have appear 'd formerly in
England, and what has happen 'd in those Years (London: J. Read, 1710?). [British
Library, 1104.a.24]

2 April 1716, Tallin, Baltic Sea: Clouds fighting

Two large dark clouds engaged in combat, and many smaller fast clouds.
The phenomenon was observed over the Baltic Sea, near Revel (modern Tallinn). The
reports come from various official documents and ship logbooks. It was the second day of
Easter, at around 9:00 P.M., when a dense or black cloud appeared in the sky. Its base was
wide but its top was pointed, and it seemed to travel upwards quickly, "so that in less than
three minutes its angle of elevation reached half of a right angle." As the cloud appeared
"there manifested in the WNW direction an enormous shining comet that ascended up to
about 12 degrees above the horizon." At this moment, a second dark cloud rose from the
north, approaching the first one: "There formed between these two clouds, from the northeastern side, a bright light in the shape of a column that for a few minutes did not change
its position..."
One version states that this column of light remained still for around ten minutes.
Then the second cloud moved very quickly through the column, "and hit the other cloud
that was moving from the east." The collision produced "great fire and smoke" for about
fifteen minutes, "after which it began to gradually fade and ended with the appearance of a
multitude of bright arrows reaching an [angular] altitude of 80 degrees above the horizon."
Source: M. B. Gershtein, "A Thousand Years of Russian UFOs," RIAP Bulletin (Ukraine)
7, 4, October-December 2001. The two accounts provided here were made by Baron de
Bie, the ambassador of the Netherlands, and Russian Commander N. A. Senyavin.

6 March 1717, at sea southwest of Martinique
Hovering object

A solid object like a mast hovers two feet above the water. In his log Chevalier de
Ricouart, captain of the frigate La Valeur, noted: "At two in the morning we were making
some progress in a southeast direction. We saw something like the mast of a ship pass
alongside, standing up about two feet above the water."
Source: Michel Bougard, La chronique des OVNI (Paris: Delarge, 1977), 104.

19 March 1719, Oxford, England: A physicist puzzled
Very bright, whitish and blue object moving from the west in a straight line at 8:15 P.M.,
much slower than a meteor. Multiple witnesses all over England, including the VicePresident of the Royal Society, physicist Sir H. Sloane, who saw it travel over 20 degrees
in "less than half a minute." Although listed as a meteor, the slow speed is most curious.
Source: Sir Edmund Halley, "An Account of the Extraordinary Meteor Seen All Over
England," Philosophical transactions of the Royal society of London 30 (1720): 978-990.

181

16 January 1721, Bern, Switzerland
Three globes emerge from a pillar of fire

At night, there "was perceived a great Pillar of Fire standing over the Mountains, near that
City, to the Westward of its Fortifications, which advancing by little and little toward the
City, burst at length, without making any great Noise, and then three Globes of Fire was
seen to Issue out of it, which took each of them a different Way, and at length
disappeared."

Source: Anon., An account of terrible apparitions and prodigies which hath been seen
both upon Earth and Sea, in the end of Last, and beginning of this present Year, 1721
(Glasgow: Thomas Crawford, 1721), 5-7.

Fig. 30: Prodigies in Bern

29 October 1726, Vilvoorde, Brabant, Belgium
Terrifying objects CD
About nine o'clock at night and for two consecutive hours were seen in the sky "horrible
and strange meteors" that came among the clouds like lightning and disappeared in the
same way. Their aspect was most terrifying.
In the absence of a more complete description, we cannot exclude the notion that
witnesses may have observed an aurora borealis.
Source: J. Nauwelaers, Histoire de la Ville de Vilvorde, vol. 2 (Paris, 1941).

1729, Finis Terrae Cape, Galicia, Spain
Strangers from the sky
A local story claims that three men came out of a cloud, had a meal at the market, took off
and flew south.
Source: Benito Jeronimo Feijoo, Teatro critico universal (1726-1740), Volume Three
(1729). Text from the Madrid edition of 1777, 86-87.

1 October 1729, Noes, Uppland, Sweden: Fiery globe
Two hours prior to sunrise, M. Suen-Hof saw red vapors in the sky, which stretched in
wide bands from north to south, then proceeded to gather together into a fiery globe about
two feet in diameter. The globe kept moving in the same direction where the reddish
vapors had appeared. It emitted sparks and was as bright as the sun. After moving through
a quarter of the sky it disappeared abruptly, leaving thick black smoke and a burst of
sound similar to cannon shot.
Source: Sestier, La Foudre et ses formes, T.I., 222. Cited by Camille Flammarion, Bolic

Inexpliques par leur aspect bizarre et la lenteur de leur parcours-Bradytes, in Etudes et
Lecturessur l'Astronomie (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1874), T.5, 143.

2 November 1730, Salamanca, Spain
Globe of fire with beams
Torres himself was a witness to the incident. He wrote that at 11:30 P.M. he saw, from
Salamanca, "an amazing Globe of fire," as large as a building. On each side of the globe
were two luminous beams or columns which seemed to rise and fall, "becoming brighter
as they moved." The columns changed from green to red and the light from the
phenomenon illuminated the surrounding area. At two o'clock in the morning the columns
joined together but the spectacle did not disappear until 4:30 A.M.
Though often cited as a UFO, many consider the event to have been an aurora
borealis.

Source: Diego de Torres Villaroel, Juicio, i Prognostics del Globo, i Tres Columnas de
Fuego (Madrid: Manuel Caballero, 1730).

9 December 1731, Florence, Italy
Unexplained luminous "cloud"
"A luminous cloud was seen, driven with some violence from east to west, where it
disappeared below the horizon." A contemporary author named Bianchini speaks of
several strange luminous spheres making a whirring sound.
Source: Robert Mallet, "Catalogue of recorded earthquakes from 1606 BC to AD 1850,"

Annual Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1852), and
"Third Report on the facts of earthquake phenomena," id., 1853 and 1854.

17 March 1735, London, England: Unexplained light
Dr. John Bevis observed an unknown light in the sky. It remained stationary for one hour.
Source: John Bevis, MD. "An Account of a Luminous Appearance in the Sky, seen at
London..." Philosophical Transactions (1739-1741), 41: 347-349.

5 December 1737, Sheffield, England
Beams of hot light from a luminous body
At about 5 P.M. a peculiar phenomenon was seen. The witness (astronomer Thomas
Short) described it as "a dark red cloud that made its appearance, with a luminous body
underneath that sent out very brilliant beams of light."
It did not look anything like aurora borealis, because the light beams were moving
slowly for some time, then stopped. Suddenly the air was so hot that he had to take off his
shirt, although he was outside.
183

Source: Thomas Short, "An Account of Several Meteors, Communicated in a Letter from
Thomas Short, MD to the President," Philosophical Transactions (1683-1775), 41
(1739-1741): 625-630.

6 December 1737, Bucharest, Romania: Red intruder
In the afternoon, an object only described as a "Symbolic form," blood-red in color,
appeared from the west. After remaining in the sky for two hours it split into two parts that
shortly joined again and went back towards the west.

Source: Ion Hobana and Julien Weverbergh, Les Ovni en URSS et dans les Pays de I'Est

(Paris: Robert Laffont, 1972), 287-288, citing Biblioteca Academiei Romane, BAR ms.
rom. 2342, fol. 3-4.

23 February 1740, Toulon, France
Rising purple globe plunges, releases balls of fire CD
During the night of 23 to 24 February people saw a purple "globe of fire" that rose
gradually, and then appeared to plunge into the sea, where it rebounded. Reaching a
certain height, it blew up and spread several balls of fire over the sea and the mountains. It
made a sound like that of a violent thunderclap or a bomb as it burst. The witnesses
reported the event to the Marquis de Caumont.

Source: Histoire de 1'Academic des Sciences, 1740.
23 October 1740, England
Unknown planetoid orbiting Venus
Astronomer and mathematician James Short, one of the most prolific telescope makers of
the 18 century, reported his observation of what he thought was a satellite of Venus
(later called "Neith" by Hozeau). The heliocentric longitude of Venus was 68° and its
elongation 46°.
th

Source: "The Problematical Satellite of Venus," in The Observatory 1 (1884): 222-226.

16 December 1743, London, England
Slow, waving 'rocket'
A correspondent of the Royal Society reports on an unusual sighting in these terms:
"As I was returning home from the Royal Society to Westminster, (at) 8h 40m, being
about the Middle of the Parade in St. James Park, I saw a Light arise from behind the
Trees and Houses in the S. by W. point, which I took at first for a large Sky-Rocket; but
when it had risen to the Height of about 20 Degrees, it took a motion nearly parallel to the
Horizon, but waved in this manner, and went on to the N. by E. Point over the Houses.
"It seemed to be so very near, that I thought it passed over Queen's Square, the Island
in the Park, cross the Canal, and I lost Sight of it over the Haymarket. Its Motion was so

184

very slow, that I had it above half a Minute in View, and therefore had Time enough to

contemplate its Appearance fully, which was what is seen in the annexed Figure."
"A seemed to be a light Flame, turning backwards from the Resistance the Air made
to it. BB a bright Fire like burning Charcoal, enclosed as it were in a open Case, of which
the Frame CCC was quite opaque, like Bands of Iron. At D issued forth a Train or Tail of
light Flame, more bright at D, and growing gradually fainter at E, so as to be transparent
more than half its Length. The Head seemed about half a Degree in Diameter, the Tail
near 3 Degrees in Length, and about one Eighth of a Degree in Thickness."
Note: Given such a precise observer, it is difficult to call this phenomenon an
ordinary meteor.

Fig. 31: "Waving rocket" in London
'Slow' meteors are known to exist but they are poorly explained: Camille
Flammarion called them bradytes but he acknowledged they were extremely rare. If this
happened today we would suspect a satellite re-entry, but there was no such thing in 1743.

Source: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A3 (1745): 524.
23 June 1744, Knott, Scotland: Armed men in the sky
Twenty-six witnesses, including a judge, observed a troop of armed men in the sky above
a hill: "A man named D. Stricket, then servant to Mr. Lancaster, of Blakehills, saw, one
evening about 7 o'clock, a troop of horses riding leisurely along Souter Fell in
Cumberland."
After he called his master, "Mr. Lancaster discovered the aerial troopers," who
became visible near a place called Knott. They were in sight for two hours and "this
phenomenon was seen by every person (twenty-six in number) in every cottage within the
distance of a mile."

Source: Statement attested before a magistrate by Lancaster and Stricket on the 21st of
July, 1745. See "Phantom Armies" in Milwaukee (Wisconsin) Sentinel, November 1,
1871 citing A Folio of Apparitions and Wonders, preserved in the British Museum; also,

185

Arminian Magazine, consisting chiefly of extracts and original treatises on universal
redemption 18 (May, 1795): 244-245.

14 July 1745, London, England: Flying trumpet
Reverend George Costard reported seeing an object shaped like a trumpet, flying over
Stanlake Broad about 8 P.M.
Source: "Part of a Letter from The Rev. Mr. Geo. Costard to Mr. John Catlin, concerning
a Fiery Meteor seen in the Air..." Philosophical Transactions 43 (1744-1745): 522-524.

5 August 1748, Aberdeen, Scotland
Three globes of light
Eleven witnesses swore before the city council of Aberdeen they had observed three
globes of light, men and armies in the sky, at 2 P.M. in a valley located five miles west of
the city. They first assumed the three globes of light were meteorological in nature, but

their intensity increased, and twelve tall men then appeared, dressed in bright clothes.
They walked across the valley, followed by two armies that appeared to re-enact the battle
of Culloden, near Inverness, which had taken place on 16 April 1746.
In cases of "armies in the sky" and heavenly battles we generally suspect an aurora,
but the timing of this sighting (early afternoon) excludes this interpretation.
Source: Flying Saucer Review 32, vol. 17, no. 6 (1971), citing a letter by Roger Sandell, in
Culloden by John Prebble (chapter 7). Another letter dated September 5, 1748, relates this
story and mentions the "three globes of light". This source, signed R. F. (Robert Forbes),
cites an extract from an older letter dated August 20, 1748, in which "a gentleman of
Aberdeen" writes to his correspondent in Edinburgh about the visionary battle that took

place on August 5, 1748. See The Lyon in mourning, a collection of speeches, letters,
journals, etc. relative to the affairs of Prince Charles Edward Stuart, by the Rev. Robert
Forbes, A.M., Bishop of Ross and Caithness, 1746-1775. Edited from his Manuscript by
Henry Paton, vol. II (Edinburgh: Scottish History Society, 1895), 181-182.

1752, Kazan, Russia: Abducted in a flying cauldron
A man named " Yashka" reportedly met a stranger dressed in white who took him to a
flying cauldron. He believed he visited another world, and then returned to the Earth.

186

Source: Vadim Chernobrov, Synodic Archives (Kazan University, 1909), No. 635:135,
V.XXV.

15 April 1752, Stavanger, Norway: Flying octagon
"An octagonal luminosity in the sky emitted fireballs from its angles."

Source: Alexis Perey, Surles tremblements de terre de la peninsule scandinave (Paris,
1842), 17. Perey draws from La Gazette, June 10th, 1752.

1 June 1752, Angermannland, Sweden
Bright streak emits balls of light
Between 4 and 5 A.M., luminous "balls of fire" emerged from a bright streak in the sky
extending from the northeast to the southwest, for 12 to 13 miles along the coast.
Source: Robert Mallet and John William Mallet, The Earthquake Catalogue of the British
Association (British Association for the Advancement of Science, London: Taylor &
Francis, 1858).

15 August 1754, Amsterdam and Chiswick, England
Sphere at ground level
After sunset a strange sphere, with an apparent diameter equal to that of the full moon,
was observed shooting blinding bright beams, and descending close to ground level.
Source: The Gentleman's Magazine 25 (1755): 461-462.

29 December 1758, Colchester, Essex, England
Wandering oval object
At 8.00 P.M., an object described by contemporary eyewitnesses as looking like a huge
football seemed to descend from the sky. It then "vanished like a squib without a report."

Source: London Magazine 27 (1758): 685.
20 May 1759, unknown location
Unexplained satellite of Venus

Astronomer Andreas Mayer reported an observation of a planetoid object seemingly
orbiting Venus.
Source: Mayer's observation first appeared as a very brief footnote in his book,
Observationes veneris gryphiswaldenses (1762), 16-17. The full report was first published

by Johann-Heinrich Lambert in 1776 in Astronomisches Jahrbuch oder Ephemeriden fur
das Jahr 1778 (Berlin, 1776), 186.

16 September 1759, Lonmora, Sweden
Abducted for four days
The following handwritten text is recorded in the parish book of Ramsberg, Sweden:

187

"In the evening of 16 September 1759, the crofter Jacob Jacobsson 's eldest son
Jacob, 22 years old, had crossed the lake, Vastra Kiolsjon, to the crofter Anders Nilson at
Lonmora, to deliver the food packet for him and his father for the following day's work in
the Woods. Coming back across the lake, as he pulled the boat upon the shore, something
strange happened to him.
"A large and broad road appeared before him. He followed it and soon reached a
large red mansion, in his own words, 'with grander buildings than Gamlebo.' Soon he
found himself seated on a bench by the door in a big chamber. He saw a chubby little man
with a red cap on his head, sitting at the end of a table, and crowds of little people
running back and forth. They were in every way like ordinary men, but of short stature. A
bit taller than the rest was a fine-looking maiden, who offered him food and drink. He

said, 'No, thank you.' The Little people asked him whether he wanted to stay with them,
and he answered, 'God, help me back home to my father and mother!' Then the man with
the red cap said, 'Throw him out, he has such an ugly mouth!'

' In the next instant he was back by the lake shore, and from there he returned home.
His parents greeted him with pleasure. They had been very worried; together with the
neighbors they had searched the woods and the lake for him. Four days and nights had

passed without a trace of him. When he finally came back on Thursday evening he had not
eaten or slept for four days, yet he had no desire for food or drink. He thought he had
been away only for a little while. The following day everything was normal except for an
uneasy feeling in his body and mind.
"Jacob made this statement to me in the presence of his parents on St. Michael's Day
1759. This boy has quite a simple, pious, meek and gentle character. He is praised by
everyone; all his life he has been known to take pleasure in reading and contemplating
God's words whenever he has some spare time. "
Source: Ramsberg sockens kyrkobok, El: 1, 1786-1774, handwritten entry by Reverend
Vigelius. The book is kept at Landsarkivet, Uppsala, Sweden. Translation by Clas Svahm

7 May 1761, France: Planetoid orbiting Venus
Prominent French astronomer J. L. Lagrange observed an object that seemed to be in orbit
around Venus. He announced that its orbital plane was perpendicular to the ecliptic.
Venus was then an evening "star" at 207° heliocentric longitude and 34° elongation.
Source: "The Problematical Satellite of Venus," The Observatory 7 (1884): 222-226.

6 June 1761, unknown location
Planetoid orbiting Venus
Astronomer Scheuten reported an object that he observed while tracking Venus in transit
across the disk of the Sun. The planet was accompanied by a smaller dark spot on one
side, which followed Venus in its transit.
Source: "The Problematical Satellite of Venus," The Observatory 7 (1884): 222-226.

26 December 1761, Weyloe, Denmark
A pale object emits a beam
"The following letter was received from Weyloe, in the diocese of Copenhagen:
"On the 26th of December last, about ten at night, there arose a great storm. I did not
go to bed, and about four minutes past two in the morning, I observed a sudden light
across my windows, which I took for lightning: the storm at this time increased not a little.
I kept my eye fixed at my window; and at four o'clock I perceived a ray of light which
seemed to come in a horizontal direction from the moon, to appearance about a toise and
half (nine feet) in length, and about the thickness of a man's arm. Rays darted from it on
each side.
"Running into my garden, I saw a ball of fire, about the size of a common ball,
running gently from south to north. At first the ball was of a pale colour, like the sun
covered with clouds, and threw out many rays. It grew more and more red, and smaller,
and in two minutes disappeared without noise or smoke. My astonishment was the greater,
as the tempest ceased soon after, though it had been accompanied with such violent blasts

of wind, that many imagined they felt the shock of an earthquake. I have spoken to a
dozen of people, who also saw it. Of all the phaenomena I have seen in Norway, I
remember none equal to this, nor attended with like circumstances."
Given the weather environment, one could hypothesize globular lightning, but the
description of multiple beams is highly unusual.

189

Source: The annual register, or a view of the history, politics, and literature, for the year
1761, 5th Ed (London: J. Dodsley, 1786), 67.

February 1762, Nuremberg, Germany
Unknown astronomical object
Single object, "a black round spot" passing in front of the Sun, as observed by Mr.
Staudacher. He missed it the next day, and commented, "Perhaps this is a new planet."
Source: "Observations of the transits of intra-mercurial planets or other bodies across the
Sun's disk." The Observatory (1879): 135.

9 August 1762, Basel and Solothurn, Switzerland
Slow-flying spindle in the Sky

Two witnesses at separate observatories (Rostan in Basel and Croste in Solothurn)
reported a vast spindle-shaped cigar in slow flight in front of the Sun.
Monsieur de Rostan, an astronomer and member of the Medicophysical Society of
Basel, Switzerland, observed the object with the aid of a telescope as it eclipsed the sun.
This object could be observed daily for almost a month from Lausanne and also by a
second astronomer in Sole, near Basel. Monsieur de Rostan traced its outline with a
camera obscura and sent the image to the Royal Academy of Sciences in Paris. The
drawing has not been preserved, unfortunately, but there is no doubt that it once existed
and was regarded with some amazement. As this is historically an important incident the
original report is produced in full below:

An account of a very singular phenomenon seen in the disk of the sun, in different parts of
Europe, and not in others.
"The 9th of August, 1762, M. de Rostan, of the economic society at Berne, of the
medico-physical society at Basle, while he was taking the sun's altitudes with a quadrant,
at Lausanne, to verify a meridian, observed that the sun gave but a faint pale light, which
he attributed to the vapours of the Leman lake; however, happening to direct a fourteen
foot telescope, armed with a micrometer, to the sun, he was surprised to see the eastern
side of the sun, as it were, eclipsed about three digits, taking in a kind of nebulosity, which
environed the opaque body, by which the sun was eclipsed.
"In the space of about two hours and a half, the fourth side of the said body, whatever
it was, appeared detached from the limb of the sun; but the limb, or, more properly, the
northern extremity of this body, which had the shape of a spindle, in breadth about three
of the sun's digits, and nine in length, did not quit the sun's northern limb. This spindle

kept continually advancing on the sun's body, from east towards west, with no more than
about half the velocity with which the ordinary solar spots move; for it did not disappear
till the 7th of September, after having reached the sun's western limb.
"M. Rostan, during that time, observed it almost every day; that is to say, for near a
month; and, by means of a camera obscura, he delineated the figure of it, which he sent to
the royal academy of sciences at Paris.
"The same phenomenon was observed at Sole, in the bishopric of Basle, situated
about five and forty German leagues northward of Lausanne. M. Coste, a friend of M. de
Rostan, observed it there, with a telescope of eleven feet, and found it of the same spindlelike form, as M. de Rostan, only it was not quite so broad; which, probably, might be
owing to this, that growing near the end of its apparition, the body began to turn about,
and present its edge.
"A more remarkable circumstance is, that at Sole it did not answer to the same point
of the sun as it did at Lausanne: it therefore had a considerable parallax: but what so very
extraordinary a body, placed between the sun and us, should be, is not easy to divine. It
was no spot, since its motion was greatly too slow; nor was it a planet or comet, its figure
seemingly proving the contrary. In a word, we know of nothing to have recourse to in the
heavens, whereby to explain this phenomenon; and, what adds to the oddness of it, M.
Messier, who, constantly observed the sun at Paris during the same time, saw nothing of
such an appearance."
Source: "Natural History: An Account of a Very Singular Phenomena Seen in the Disk of
the Sun, in Different Parts of Europe, and Not in Others," Annual Register 9 (1766):
120-121.

19 November 1762, Location unknown: Planetoid
Planet-like body passing in front of the sun: "Lichtenberg saw, with the naked eye, a gre$!
round spot of about one twelfth the diameter of the Sun, traverse a chord of 70° in 3
hours."

Source: R. C. Carrington, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 20, January
1860.

4 March 1764, unknown location
Mystery satellite of planet Venus
The supposed satellite of Venus was observed again as the planet was an evening "star."
Its heliocentric longitude was 59° and its elongation was 30°. There were no less than
eight observations of this object during 1764.
Source: "The Problematical Satellite of Venus," in The Observatory 1 (1884): 222-226.

28 March 1764, unknown location
Mystery satellite of planet Venus

Another reliable observation of a planetoid object apparently orbiting Venus. The planet's
heliocentric longitude was 98° and its elongation was 35°.
Source: "The Problematical Satellite of Venus," The Observatory 7 (1884): 222-226.

May 1764, near Gotha, Germany: Unknown object
Single object, seen passing in front of the sun by Mr. Hoffmann. It was a large round spot
of about one fifteenth the diameter of the Sun, crossing it slowly north to south.
Source: "Observations of the transits of intra-mercurial planets or other bodies across the
Sun's disk," The Observatory 29 (1879): 135.

13 June 1765, Mount Prospect, Inishannon, Ireland
Sky throne
"Last Monday Evening, between eight and nine o'Clock, an extraordinary Phaenomenon
was seen from Mount-Prospect, near Inishannon, by several Gentlemen and Ladies. A
most superb Throne appeared in the Northern Sphere, enclosed by a broad Circle of a
Gold Colour, with a Lion in the front Protecting the Throne, which appearance lasted
about half an Hour, and went off by slow Degrees. The Evening was very Serene, and the

Sky all around appeared quite black. We are assured of the Truth of this Relation by
People of Veracity."

Source: The Public Register, or Freemans Journal (Dublin, Ireland) 15 June, 1765.
8 September 1767, Perthshire, Scotland
Large luminous pyramid leaves damage in its wake
"We hear from Perthshire, that an uncommon phaenomenon was observed on the water of
Isla, near Cupor Angus, preceded by a thick dark smoke, which soon dispelled, and
discovered a large luminous body, like a house on fire, but presently after took a form
something pyramidal, and rolled forwards with impetuosity till it came to the water of
Erick, up which river it took its direction, with great rapidity, and disappeared a little
above Blairgowrie. The effects were as extraordinary as the appearance.
"In its passage, it carried a large cart many yards over a field of grass; a man riding
along the high road was carried from his horse, and so stunned with the fall, as to remain
senseless a considerable time. It destroyed one half of a house, and left the other behind,
undermined and destroyed an arch of the new bridge building at Blairgowrie, immediately
after which it disappeared."
Source: Letter from Edinburgh dated 8 Sept. 1767, in The Annual Register, 1767.

4 January 1768, Copenhagen, Denmark
Unidentified planetoid orbiting Venus
Astronomer Christian Horrebow reported an observation of "a small light, that was not a
star" which appeared to be in orbit around Venus. This object, named "Neith" by M.
Hozeau of Brussels observatory, was never identified with certainty and was certainly not
a natural satellite.
Source: H. C. F. C. Schjellerup, "On some hitherto unknown observations of a supposed
satellite of Venus," Copernicus 2 (Dublin, 1882): 164-168.

24 October 1769, Oxford, England
Hovering intruder CD
An object like a "house on fire" seen in the sky for an hour. It moved up and down with
jets of gas, rumbled.
Source: John Swinton, "An account of a very remarkable Meteor seen at Oxford",
Philosophical Transactions, 60 (London, 1771): 532-535.

8 May 1775, Waltham Abbey, Hertfordshire, England
Light ball
"At 8:30 P.M. a remarkable phenomenon was observed by a gentleman at Waltham
Abbey.
"A meteor, resembling a nebulous star, appeared just above the moon, passed
eastward, with a slow motion, parallel to the ecliptic, through an arch of about 5 or 6
degrees, and then disappeared. It subtended an angle of 6 or 7 minutes, and was of the
same brightness and colour with the moon."
Source: The Annual Register (London, 1776): 116.

17 June 1777, France, location unknown
An unidentified Messier object
During a lunar eclipse, astronomer Charles Messier observed dark objects moving in
parallel directions, which he described as "large and swift and they were ships, yet like
bells."
"These, Messier says, may have been hailstones or seeds in the air; but they were
more probably small meteorites."

Source: "Observations of the transits of intra-mercurial planets or other bodies across the
Sun's disk," The Observatory 29 (1879): 136.

Fig. 33: French astronomer Charles Messier
5 February 1780, Bussieres, France: Flaming dragon
About 6 P.M. a flaming "dragon" was seen in the sky for 15 minutes, illuminating
everyone below.
Source: French UFO magazine, Lumieres dans la Nuit 338.

March 1783, Japan, location unknown: Low-flyers

For several days, people reported luminous objects flying north to south "just over the
rooftops."
Source: Brothers I, 1. No original source provided.

24 June 1784, China, exact location unknown
Oscillating 'star'
A big star appeared suddenly in the southeast, scintillating. It rose and came down three
times. Another star repeated the same motion and was said to have fallen on a village.

Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 44.

11 September 1787, Edinburgh, Scotland
Wandering globe
About 8:30 P.M. people saw a fiery globe larger than the sun in a northerly direction. It
proceeded horizontally to the east, about 15 to 20 degrees in elevation. Then it descended
to the horizon, rose again higher than before with short waves in its trajectory and finally
moved west and was lost to view behind a cloud, where it seemed to explode.

Source: John Winthrop, "An Account of a Meteor Seen in New England, and of a
Whirlwind Felt in That Country: In a Letter to the Rev. Tho. Birch, D. D., Secretary to the
Royal Society, from Mr. John Winthrop, Professor of Philosophy at Cambridge in New
England," Philosophical Transactions 52 (1761-1762): 6-16.

12 June 1788, Zamora, Spain: Two large flying globes
A letter from an Irish clergyman at the University of Zamora mentions that between 4 and
5 A.M., "a most alarming and singular phenomenon appeared in the southeast quarter ofl
the Heavens. Two large globes of fire, seemingly about the bulk of a Bristol barrel, were
seen to move horizontally for a few minutes at the height of seven or eight degrees from
the surface of the earth.
They approached and dashed violently against each other, till some kind of
centrifugal force separated them, after which they steered different courses; one moving
East South East and the other West by North. As many persons were then up in the town,
numbers repaired to an adjacent hill for the advantage of prospect."
The 'meteors' proceeded slowly in their course for about twenty minutes. The one on
the southeast quarter burst with a crack that might be heard at ten miles distant. The other
continued gradually descending till it was lost to sight.

94

Source: London Times, Thursday, July 10, 1788.

12 November 1791, Gottingen, Germany
Object in front of the sun
Single witness (astronomer Lichtenberg): An object is observed passing in front of the
Sun.

Source: Philosophy Magazine 3 (1899).
19 January 1793, England, exact location unknown
Opaque body
A long opaque body was seen stationary over the center of the sun by many witnesses.

Source: Gentleman's Magazine & Historical Chronicle 63 (1793)
28 December 1793, Bucharest, Romania
Unexplained "moon"
In the evening, a man who was dining in Bucharest about 7:30 P.M. reported that "the
moon has accomplished a miracle," making a journey along the sky in half an hour.

Source: Ion Hobana and Julien Weverbergh, Les Ovni en URSS et dans les Pays de I'Est

(Paris: Robert Laffont, 1972), 222. The authors cite Biblioteca Academiei Romane, BAR
ms. rom. 2150, fol. 1110.

20 August 1794, Balasore, India
Phenomenon in the heavens
At 7:45 P.M. a number of witnesses saw an oversized meteor, brighter than any of the
planets. As it descended "it made short and frequent pauses, at which times it appeared far
more brilliant than while it was in motion."
The object was lost to sight behind the hills, but not for long: "We expected to have
seen no more of it: but in about two minutes after we observed it again, ascending above
the hills, where it balanced and waved several times, in a horizontal direction, North and
South: it then sank again, illuminating the hills in its declination as before. It rose and fell
a second and a third time, with little variation in its movements, after which we saw it no
more and all around was darkness."
95

Source: The Star (London, England), Saturday, March 14, 1795, issue 2049.

27 January 1795, Quangxi prov., Linggui area, China
Crash of a large maneuvering light

A large "star" in the Southeast rose and fell three times, followed by another one that
"crashed in a village."
Source: Shi Bo, La Chine et les Extraterrestres, op.cit., 44.

12 Oct. 1796, New Minas, Bay of Fundy, Nova Scotia
Airships
Fifteen "ships" seen in the air moving east, with ports on the side. A man aboard one ship
extended his hand.
The incident is mentioned in the five-volume diary of loyalist merchant and Judge
Simeon Perkins (1734-1812):
"A strange story is going that a fleet of ships have been seen in the air in some part of
the Bay of Fundy. Mr. Darrow is lately from there by land. I enquired of him. He says that
they were said to be seen at New Minas, at one Mr. Ratchford's by a girl about sunrise and
that the girl being frightened called out and that two men that were in the house went out
and saw the same sight, being fifteen ships and a man forward of them with his hand
stretched out. The ships made to the eastward. They were so near that the people saw their
sides and ports. The story did not obtain universal credit, but some people believed it. My
own opinion is that it was only in imagination as the clouds at sunrise..."

Source: C. B. Fergusson, ed., The Diary of Simeon Perkins 1790-1796 (Toronto: The
Champlain Society, 1961), 430.

18 January 1798, Tarbes, France
Astronomical anomaly
Astronomer D'Angos observed an object passing in front of the Sun. It was "a slightly
elliptical, sharply defined spot, about halfway between the centre and edge of the Sun,
which passed off about 25 minutes afterwards."
Source: "Observations of the transits of intra-mercurial planets or other bodies across t
Sun's disk," The Observatory 29 (1879): 136.

10 Sept. 1798, Alnwick, Northumberland, England
Cylinder
A particularly graphic case of a shape-changing UFO was reported by a Northumberland
schoolteacher, Alexander Campbell, and a friend. According to The Annual Register for
1798 when the object first appeared high up in the south-western sector of the sky it
seemed to be no bigger than a star, but as it came closer it "expanded into the form and
size of an apothecary's pestle."
"It was then obscured by a cloud, which was still illuminated behind; when the cloud
was dispelled, it reappeared with a direction south and north, with a small long streamer,

cutting the pestle a little below the centre, and issuing away to the eastward. It was again
obscured, and, on its re-appearance, the streamer and the pestle had formed the appearance
of a hammer or a cross; presently after the streamer, which made the shaft to the hammer,
or stalk to the cross, assumed two horns to the extreme point, towards the east, resembling
a fork. It was then a third time obscured, but when the cloud passed over, it was changed
into the shape of two half moons, back to back, having a short thick luminous stream
between the two backs; it then vanished totally from their sight. It is observable that every
new appearance became brighter and brighter, till it became an exceedingly brilliant
object, all the other stars, in comparison, appearing to be only dim specks."
The sighting lasted some five minutes in all.
Source: Inforespace 28, quoting from The Annual Register 83 (London, 1798).

July 1799, Bruges, Belgium
Unexplained maneuvering "meteor"
An unusual "meteor" crosses the sky towards the south and returns north, then makes a
45-degree turn to the northwest, proving it was no natural object, and certainly not a
meteor.
Source: T. Forster, "A Memoir on Meteors of Various Sorts," Philosophical Magazine

and Journal of Science, July-Dec. 1847.

13 November 1799, Gerona, Catalonia, Spain
Maneuvering stars
Numerous brilliant "shooting stars" are seen to cluster together, and then separate.
Source: A. Quintana, "Assaig sobre el clima d'Olot.," Servei Meteorologic de Catalunya,
Generalitat de Catalunya, Notes d'Estudi 69: 3-88 (Barcelona, 1938).

Epilogue to Part I-E
The Era of Human Flight Begins
By the end of the 18 century political events reflected a nearly-universal thirst for
knowledge and liberty, and the rejection of authoritarian principles. The American
Declaration of Independence in 1776, and the French Revolution of 1789, had ushered in a
new, often troubled series of intellectual movements inspired by science.
In 1797, German astronomer Olbers had published a method for calculating the orbits
of comets, thus removing them from the realm of cosmic enigmas to treat them rationally
as solar system objects. Lithography was invented the following year by Aloys Senefelder,
another German. In 1800 William Herschel discovered infrared solar rays and Volta
produced electricity from batteries of zinc and copper.
Nothing could now stop the rise of science and technology: in 1801 Bichat published
his Anatomie Generale while Lalande released a catalogue of 47,390 stars. An American
engineer, Robert Fulton, built the first submarine, the Nautilus. London became a city of
864,000 and Paris claimed 547,000 inhabitants. It was the time of Beethoven, Paganini,
and Haydn. The world had made a momentous transition from the Age of Reason to the
Enlightenment.
As accurately noted by the people's chronicle of our own times, Wikipedia, "The
Enlightenment was a time when the solar system was truly discovered: with the accurate
calculation of orbits, the discovery of the first planet since antiquity, Uranus by William
Herschel, and the calculation of the mass of the sun using Newton's theory of universal
th

198

gravitation. These series of discoveries had a momentous effect on both pragmatic
commerce and philosophy. The excitement engendered by creating a new and orderly
vision of the world, as well as the need for a philosophy of science that could encompass
the new discoveries, greatly influenced both religious and secular ideas. If Newton could
order the cosmos with natural philosophy, so, many argued, could political philosophy
order the body politic."
This was also the period when humanity began to challenge gravity as well, and made
the first attempts to fly. In the late 1780s, as enthusiasm for the "Industrial Revolution"
was felt, the Montgolfier brothers invented the montgolfiere, or hot air balloon. They were
the sons of a paper manufacturer at Annonay, near Lyon. When playing with inverted
paper bags over open fire they found that the bags rose to the ceiling. This led them to
experiment further with larger bags made of other materials. During 1782 they tested
indoors with silk and linen balloons.
On December 14, 1782 they succeeded in an outdoor launch of an 18 m 3 silk bag,
which reached an altitude of 250 m. On June 5, 1783, as a first public demonstration, they
sent up at Annonay a 900 m 3 linen bag inflated with hot air. Its flight covered 2 km, lasted
10 minutes, and had an estimated altitude of over 1600 m. The subsequent test sent up the
first living beings in a basket: a sheep, a duck and a cockerel, to ascertain the effects of
higher altitude. This was performed at Versailles, before Louis XVI of France, to gain his
permission for a trial human flight.
On November 21, 1783, the first free flight by humans was made by Pilatre de Rozier
and the Marquis d'Arlandes, who flew aloft for 25 minutes about 100 m above Paris for
nine kilometers. (Karl Friedrich Meerwein with his flapping "ornithopter" probably
preceded this event in 1781, but it never became a viable means of flight.)
Any study of unexplained aerial phenomena after the year 1800 must take into
account not only the possible explanations we have already discussed (atmospheric
effects, optical illusions, aurorae, meteors, comets, globular lightning, mystical visions,
199

and hallucinations) but other causes, from simple balloon observations to over-excited
press reports and hoaxes inspired by the passion of the early days of human flight.

PART I-F
Nineteenth-Century Chronology
The first half of the nineteenth century, which culminated in the worldwide extension of
the Industrial Revolution that had begun around 1770 in England, was marked by a vast
increase in scientific education. Curiosity towards all the phenomena of nature was
encouraged; observatories and laboratories sprang up in every nation, and it became
fashionable to report original contributions to the knowledge of science or, as it was
called, "natural philosophy."
In the course of their observations scientists, both amateur and professional, noted
unknown phenomena and reported them without fear of censorship or ridicule. In contrast
with the rigid adherence to conformism in the name of rationalism that plagues the
modern academic community, there is a pleasant sense of freedom and curiosity when one
reads the reports of that era. Astronomers were eager to attach their name to discoveries of
comets, new planets or unusual phenomena, leading to open, unbiased examination of any
novel report.
The search for a planet (tentatively named "Vulcan") whose orbit would place it
between Mercury and the Sun is a case in point. It was motivated by the irregularities in
the motion of Mercury. Celestial mechanics had become sophisticated enough for
astronomers of the time to record such minute differences-hence the need for actual
observations of new planetoid bodies that could account for an effect on Mercury.

When Le Verrier, the celebrated director of Paris observatory whose brilliant
calculations led to the discovery of Neptune in 1846, tried to prove his hypothesis about
the existence of an intra-mercurial planet, he actually encouraged serious observers the
world over to come forward with any sighting of unknown objects in the vicinity of the
sun. As Le Verrier told the French Academy of Sciences on 2 July 1849: "I felt profound
surprise, as I worked on the theory of Mercury and saw that the mean motion of that
planet, as determined by observations of the last 40 years, was notably weaker than
indicated by the comparison of older data with modern ones. My attempts to reach a
theory that would resolve this have been unsatisfactory so far." (quoted in L 'Evolution de
l'Astronomie auXIXe Siecle, by Pierre Busco. Paris: Larousse, 1912).
Ten years later, in a celebrated letter to Faye, Le Verrier stated he had reached a
solution, calling for the existence of one or more intra-mercurial planets. He went on to
call for careful observation of any unusual object passing in front of the sun:
"The present discussion should confirm astronomers in their zeal to scrutinize the
surface of the sun every day. It is most important that any spot of regular shape, as small
as it is, which would happen to be seen on the disk of the Sun, be tracked for some time
with the greatest care, in order to ascertain its nature through knowledge of its motion."
This invitation to observe the sky for anomalous objects sent hundreds of
professionals and well-equipped amateurs to rummage through records of past
observations and to spend more time at the telescope. As a result, many of the references
we have accumulated in this section no longer come from obscure local papers but from
the mainstream scientific literature, from the Comptes Rendus of the French Academy of

201

Sciences to Philosophy Magazine or the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Institute.

The many calculations never led to the discovery of the intra-mercurial planet, much
to Le Verrier's chagrin.
Early in the 20 century, Einstein's relativity theory accounted nicely for the
perturbations of Mercury, and astronomy no longer needed the elusive planetoid! Even the
th

good reverend Webb, whose classic books on Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes
are still used as a reference by astronomers the world over, suffered the indignity of
having his own observations of an unknown planet censored from recent printings, such as
the popular paperback edition of 1962. All such data published in the nineteenth century
were swept under the weighty rug of scientific oblivion, leaving only a few people like us
to recompile these "damned" facts and ask: What was it?

374.

20 March 1800, Quedlinburg, Germany
Fast-moving object

A preacher and amateur astronomer named Fritsch reported an unknown object rapidly
crossing the disk of the sun.
Source: E. Ledger, "Observations or supposed observations of the transits of intramercurial planets or other bodies across the Sun's disk," The Observatory 3 (1879-80):
136.
30 September 1801, London, England
Unusual formation

375.

Between five and six in the morning, a very bright object was seen in the East. It was
"shaped something like a cross; this was accompanied by two smaller ones like stars, one
towards the left, which was also bright; and one just perceptible a little below it, the whole
moving fast towards the South."
202

Source: London Times, 8 October 1801, 3.

376.

7 February 1802, Quedlinburg, Germany
Dark celestial body

An unknown dark body is again observed crossing the Sun, "having rapid motion of its
own" by amateur astronomer Fritsch. The tiny spot crossed the Sun in a northwesterly
direction and accelerated.
Source: E. Ledger, "Observations or supposed observations of the transits of intramercurial planets or other bodies across the Sun's disk," The Observatory 3 (1879-80):
136.
377.

10 October 1802, Magdeburg, Germany
Astronomer's report of a dark moving object
Le Verrier reports an unknown dark object seen by Fritsch, rapidly crossing the sun's disk.
He writes: "Fritsch, at Magdeburg, saw a spot moving 2 minutes of arc in 3 minutes
of time, and not seen after a cloudy interval of 4 hours."
Source: Le Verrier, "Examen des observations qu'on a presentees, a diverses epoques,
comme pouvant appartenir aux passages d'une planete intra-mercurielle devant le disque

du Soleil," Comptes Rendus of the French Academy of Sciences 83 (1876): 583-9, to
587-8.

378.
15 August 1803, Ormans near Evilliers, France
Luminous globes and a religious discovery
Two luminous globes emit sun-like rays and hover over a tree. Witnesses: Pierre Mille,
from Malcote, with his three daughters and a local craftsman.
The whole family was on its way to church for the Feast of the Assumption when
they saw two small lights in front of an oak tree, inside which a small statue of the Virgin
Mary was found upon investigation.
Some time before (at Easter) the youngest daughter of Pierre Mille had seen the
Virgin accompanied by two small floating lights at the same spot, "on the path between
Maizieres and Ornans."
Source: Abbe Louis Leroy, Histoire des Pelerinages de la Sainte Vierge en France, Tome
II (Paris, 1874), 265.

379.
27 June 1806, Geneva, New York, USA
Dark object crossing the lunar disk
At 1:00 A.M. astronomer W. R. Brooks, director of Smith Observatory, recorded the
passage of a long, dark object that crossed the disk of the moon in 3 to 4 seconds, moving
west to east. It did not appear to be a bird.
Brooks was observing with a two-inch telescope at magnification 44X. The object
was about one third the apparent size of the moon.

Source: Science Magazine, 31 July 1896; Scientific American lb: 251.
380.
July 1806, Maine: White globe and glowing specter
In 1806 the Rev. Abraham Cummings set out to investigate the apparition of a ghost. A
serious scholar with a Master's degree from Brown University, he was sure the tales
would turn out to be fraudulent. The philosopher C. J. Ducasse reproduces Cummings'
testimony as follows:
"Some time in July 1806, in the evening, I was informed by two persons that they had
just seen the Spectre in the field. About ten minutes after, I went out, not to see a miracle
for I believed they had been mistaken. Looking toward an eminence twelve rods distance
from the house, I saw there as I supposed one of the white rocks. This confirmed my
opinion of their spectre, and I paid no attention to it.
"Three minutes after, I accidentally looked in the same direction, and the white rock
was in the air; its form a complete globe, with a tincture of red and its diameter about two
feet. Fully satisfied that this was nothing ordinary I went toward it for more accurate
examination. While my eye was constantly upon it, I went on for four or five steps, when
it came to me from the distance of eleven rods, as quick as lightning, and instantly
assumed a personal form with a female dress, but did not appear taller than a girl seven
years old. While I looked upon her, I said in my mind "you are not tall enough for the
woman who has so frequently appeared among us!" Immediately she grew up as large and
tall as I considered that woman to be.

"Now she appeared glorious. On her head was the representation of the sun diffusing
the luminous, rectilinear rays every way to the ground. Through the rays I saw the
personal form and the woman's dress."
Cummings wrote that the entity was encountered on scores of occasions, and in his
report he included thirty affidavits from witnesses to prove it. In all cases a small
luminous cloud appeared first and then grew until it took the form of the deceased woman.
Afterwards it would take its exit in much the same way.

Source: C. J. Ducasse, Paranormal Phenomena, Science and Life After Death (New York
Parapsychology Foundation, 1969); Abraham Cummings, Immortality Proved by the
Testimony of Sense (Bath, Maine, 1826).

381.
7 August 1806, Rutherford, North Carolina
Flying things, white beings
"Patsey Reaves, a widow woman, who lives near the Appalachian Mountain, declared,
that about 6 o'clock P.M., her daughter Elizabeth, about 8 years old, was in the cotton
field, about ten poles from the dwelling house, which stands by computation, six furlongs
from the Chimney Mountain, and that Elizabeth told her brother Morgan, aged 11 years,
that there was a man on the mountain. Morgan was incredulous at first, but the little girl
affirmed it, and said she saw him, rolling rocks or picking up sticks, adding that she saw a
heap of people.
"Morgan then went to the place where she was, and called out, [saying] that he saw a
thousand or ten thousand things flying in the air. On which Polly, daughter of Mrs.

Reaves, a good four years, and a Negro woman, ran out to the children and called Mrs.
Reaves to see what a sight yonder was.
"Mrs. Reaves says she went about 8 poles towards them, and, without any sensible
alarm or fright, she turned towards the Chimney Mountain, and discovered a very
numerous crowd of beings resembling the human species but could not discern any
particular members of the human body, nor distinction of sexes; that they were of every
size, from the tallest men down to the least infants; that there were more of the small than
of the full grown, that they were all clad with brilliant white raiment; but could not
describe any form of their garment; that they appeared to rise off the mountain south of
said rock, and about as high; that a considerable part of the mountain's top was visible
about this shining host, that they moved in a northern direction, and collected about the
top of Chimney Rock.
"When all but a few had reached said rock, two seemed to rise together and behind
them about two feet, a third rose. These three moved with great agility towards the crowd,
and had the nearest resemblance of two men of any before seen. While beholding those
three her eyes were attracted by three more rising nearly from the same place, and moving
swiftly in the same order and direction. After these, several others rose and went toward
the rock."
The sighting went on for about an hour, during which time Mrs. Reaves sent for Mr.
Robert Siercy. The latter was reluctant to come as "he expected to see nothing
extraordinary," but after a second messenger was sent to him he finally arrived. At first he
glanced at the mountain without seeing anything strange, but when he took a second look
"he said he saw more glittering white appearances of human kind that ever had he seen of
men at any general view." He noticed there were entities of different sizes, "that they
moved in throngs," and that they "moved in a semicircular course between him and the
rock." Two of the larger beings seemed to go before the others at a distance of about 20
yards, where "they vanished out of sight, leaving a solemn and pleasing impression on the
mind, accompanied with a diminution of body strength."

205

Source: Statesville (North Carolina) Landmark June 15, 1883. The report was formally
made on 7 August 1806 and presented to Mr. J. Gates, Editor of the Raleigh Register and
State Gazette, where it was first published the following September.

382.

22 July 1808, Maine, USA
An old diary describes a maneuvering light
The diary of school teacher Cynthia Everett, who taught in Maine during the early 1800s,
contains the following entry:

"About 10 o 'clock I saw a very strange appearance. It was a light which proceeded
from the East. At first sight, I thought it was a Meteor, but from its motion I soon
perceived it was not. It seemed to dart at first as quickly as light, and appeared to be in
the atmosphere, but lowered toward the ground and kept on at an equal distance
sometimes ascending and sometimes descending. It moved round in the then visible
Horizon, (it was not very light) and then returned back again. "

Dr. Ranlett, a historian at the State University College at Potsdam, finds it significant
that Cynthia Everett did not explain what she witnessed as a natural phenomenon,
although she was well educated and had firsthand knowledge about the night sky. "She
was the kind of person who would have explained it as natural phenomenon, if she could
have."

Source: New York (Ogdensburg) Journal, March 29, 1978. The article describes the work
of Dr. Judith Becker Ranlett: while studying the diary of her husband's great-great
grandmother, she found this unusual sighting.
201

383.

1 September 1808, Moscow, Russia
Radiant "plate" flying over the Kremlin

Alexander Afanasyev, of the manuscript department of the Russian State History
Museum, found a document in the personal archive of a Moscow senator Peter
Poludensky. "On September 1, 1808 at 8 o'clock and 7 minutes after noon, in the sky,
clear and sown with stars, a phenomenon appeared, incomparable in its beauty and rigor,
as well as in radiance and enormous size, to anything seen before. As we noticed it,
attracted by the loud cracking sound, it was rising in an arch over the horizon, from 55' to
almost 90'. Having passed this distance in an instant, it stopped among the clouds as if
over the Kremlin and looked like a long straight plate some nine arshin (6.35 meter) long
and half arshin (0.35 meter) thick.
"Then on its front edge, turned to the South-West, an oval flame flared, some two
arshin (1.4 meter) long and one and a half arshin (about one meter) thick, with a flame that
can only be compared to the radiance of burning phosphor.
"Floating in a circle without open fire or sparkle, it nonetheless lighted everything
around as broad daylight; then the flame went out, the light disappeared, but the bright
plate remained and quite smoothly went perpendicularly upwards, reached the stars and
still could be seen for some two minutes and then, without disappearing, it became
invisible due to the extraordinary height."
A sketch was attached, depicting the flying object. Afanasyev ruled out the possibility
of a hoax based on the age of the paper and the writing style.

Fig. 34: Moscow phenomenon
384.
10 August 1809, London, Hatton Garden, England
Aerial ballet of dazzling lights

John Staveley reports he saw many objects moving around a black cloud: "They were like
dazzling specks of light, dancing and traipsing thro' the clouds. One increased in size until
it became of the brilliance and magnitude of Venus on a clear evening. But I could see no
body in the light. It moved with great rapidity, and coasted the edge of the cloud. Then it
became stationary, dimmed its splendor, and vanished. I saw these strange lights for
minutes, not seconds. For at least an hour, these lights, so strange, and in innumerable
points, played in and out of this black cloud. No lightning came from the clouds where
these lights were playing. As the meteors increased in size, they seemed to descend."
207

Source: The Edinburgh Annual Register for 18092 (1811): 508.
385.
August 1810, Meklong, Thailand: Silver entity
A missionary and physician, Dr. Jacob Hazlitt, reported that he saw a man in silver
clothing on a road outside Meklong. He described the skin of this humanoid as 'gleaming'
and added that the entity had only one eye.
According to writer Ahmad Jamaludin, there are abduction cases in Malaysia and
Indonesia where the entities involved are thought to have stepped out of a coexisting
world. The abductees themselves claim that they were taken to a different world "on the
other side of our reality." They were not subjected to medical examinations. No messages
were given and the motive behind the abduction was never known.
When they returned home, the witnesses are said to have suffered the same sideeffects as a typical UFO abductee, including temporary amnesia, extreme thirst, tiredness
and emotional upset. The locals called these beings the Bunian People, but where the

word Bunian comes from is unclear. They were said to dress in a similar way to the local
people.
4

Source: Ahmad Jamaludin, Alien Encounters, No. 17, October 1997. Unfortunately the
story is given without a precise original reference.

September 1810, Thailand
Abduction by one-eyed humanoid

386.

A woman claimed she was awakened by an unknown force one night and was surprised to
hear that the surrounding area was devoid of animal sounds. Something was not right:
Looking out the window, the lady beheld a strange humanoid in her back yard. She
claimed that the being only had one eye and was dressed in a suit that seemed to be made
out of metal. The episode ended with the woman claiming to have been abducted to a
'palace of lights'.
Source: Ahmad Jamaludin, Alien Encounters, No. 17, October 1997.

19 September 1810, Brezeau, Holland
Strange globe absorbs water

387.

A remarkable incident occurred in the Dutch village of Brezeau. The 36th volume of the
Philosophical Magazine reported that between 5:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M., "a luminous
meteor appeared to the south, and about the distance of a quarter of a league from the
small commune of Brezeau: persons who attentively examined it assert that it was nearly a
quarter of an hour in collecting, floating over the place where it was first seen; and that
when all its parts had united, it appeared all at once as a very considerable globe of fire,
taking a northerly direction."
The phenomenon "spread terror among the inhabitants of the village, who believed
their houses would be burnt, and they themselves perish." It was followed by thick fog.
Curiously, "in crossing a river it absorbed water, of which some afterwards fell as rain."
It is difficult to imagine a natural phenomenon with these characteristics. Its duration
is also an anomaly, as it lasted forty-five minutes before turning into a column of fire and
rising towards the sky.
208

Source: "Meteor seen in Holland", The Philosophical Magazine 36 (1810): 395-396.

388.
20 March 1812, near Manosque, France
Four entities inside lights
On the road from Villeneuve to Manosque, seven travelers in the coach to Digne were
scared when they observed a luminous ball that hovered over the path close to the coach.
The object split into four lights. Four human figures were seen, enclosed inside the
objects, which looked like lanterns. Terrified, the travelers chose to stop at the inn of
Quatre Tours rather than going all the way to Manosque.

Source: Louis-Joseph-Marie Robert, Notice historique surle tremblement de terre du
village de Beaumont, departement de Vaucluse, et examen des causes qui ont pu
determiner dans un pays non volcanique, 128 secousses successives dans 75 jours...,
(Aix: Augustin Pontier, 1812), 10.

8 April 1813, Atlantic Ocean
Shell-shaped floating monster

389.

As the ship "Niagara" was about latitude 43 north, longitude 65 west, a large hump was
seen on the Southern horizon, "bearing N.W. distance 6 or 8 miles ahead, which we

supposed the hull of a large ship bottom up. When within a gun shot of it, we discovered

that it had motion."
On nearer approach the sailors thought the object must be a giant fish, "apparently
200 feet in length, about 30 feet broad, and from 17 to 18 feet high in the centre."
Whatever it was, the floating object was covered with a shell. "Near the head on the right
side was a large hole or archway, covered occasionally with a fin which was at times 8 or
10 feet out of the water." The crew intended to send a boat to make further discoveries,
"but was deterred from the dreadful appearance of the monster."
Source: Log Book of the ship Niagara, captain Merry, traveling from Lisbon to New
York, cited in the Pittsburgh [New York] Republican, 14 May, 1813.

390.
25 July 1813, Portsmouth, Virginia, USA
A letter to Thomas Jefferson
Carpenter Edward Hansford wrote to Jefferson on July 31, 1813 to describe the object
which he and a Baltimore citizen named John L. Clark had witnessed:

"A Ball of fire as full as large as the sun at Maridian (sic) which was frequently
obscured within the space often minutes by a smoke emitted from its own body, but
ultimately retained its brilliancy, and form during that period, but with apparent
agitation. It then assumed the form of a turtle which also appeared much agitated and as
frequently obscured by a similar smoke. It descended obliquely to the West, and raised
again perpendicular to its original hite (sic) which was on or about 75 degrees. "
Edward Hansford lived in Norfolk County during the Revolutionary War, working on
forts erected by the Commonwealth. In 1802, he was appointed harbormaster for the
District of Norfolk and Portsmouth.

Source: "Edward Hansford to Thomas Jefferson, July 31, 1813" in The Thomas Jefferson
Papers Series 1. General Correspondence, 1651-1827. Library of Congress, Digital
Archive "American Memory" (image 1031)
http://memorv.loc.gov/ammem/collections/iefferson_papers/index.html
391.

5 September 1814, near Agen, France
Slow-moving, round object
At 11 A.M., by clear sky and as a stiff breeze was blowing, a slow moving, perfectly
round white object with a grayish center appeared at great height northwest of the town.
Although first described as a "cloud," it became completely stationary in spite of the wind
and remained in that position until about noon, when it suddenly sped off to the south,
revolving on its own axis, and emitting rumbling noises that culminated in an explosion.
A shower of stones was released, after which the "cloud" stopped again, and slowly
faded away. The explosion was heard throughout the region and terrified the inhabitants?

10

Source: Annales de Chimie et de Physique 25, tome XCII, Oct. 1814; Philosophical
Magazine & Journal 44 (1814): 316 and 45 (1815): 23-26.

392.
25 September 1817, Lanuejols, France: Large disk
At 6:25 P.M. three travelers who had just visited the roman monument near Lanuejols and
were going through the "Causse de Mende" to reach that town saw in the south-southeast
(towards Villefort) a luminous object, "reddish in color, in the shape of a disk three or four
times larger than the full Moon." It disappeared 2 or 3 minutes later. The sky was hazy
and a fine rain was falling.
Source: Le Midi Libre, 25 September 1954. We have not traced an earlier source.

6 January 1818, Ipswich, England
Unknown object near the sun

393.

Mr. Capel Lofft, an English writer (1751-1824) and Mr. Acton report a strange object near
the sun, visible three and a half hours. They saw "a small, uniformly opaque, subelliptical
spot, moving more rapidly over the Sun than Venus in transit. Before sunset it disappeared
and certainly seemed of a cometary or planetary character. This is a well-attested
instance."
Source: Capel Lofft. "On the appearance of an opaque body traversing the sun's disc,"
Monthly Magazine AS, March 1 1818, 102-3.

3 August 1818, Worthing, England
Motionless light in the sky

394.

Mr. Thomas Young saw "a very bright meteor" near Cassiopeia at 11:15 P.M. This object
started from a point 19 degrees from the pole at 65 degrees in right ascension. It moved to
17 degrees from the pole and 80 degrees in right ascension and remained motionless for a
full minute.

Source: Thomas Young, "Observations d'un meteore lumineux." Annales de Chimie et de
Physique 9, (Paris, 1818): 88-90.

395.
26 June 1819, Buchholz, Germany: Multiple planetoids
Astronomer J.W. Pastorff (1767-1838) observed what he thought was a "comet" close to
the Sun, but Olbers pointed out it could not have been a comet. The same day, Gruithuisen
(observing from Holland) reported three unknown bodies crossing the disk of the Sun, "...
viz, one near the middle of the Sun, and two small ones without nebulosity near the
western limb."
It is notable that this observation, initially published in Reverend Webb's well-known
astronomy handbooks, has been deleted from recent editions!
Source: "New planets," Annual of Scientific Discovery (1860): 410-11, at 411.

9 October 1819, Augsburg, Germany
Enormous planetary intruder

211

396.

An enormous mass passed in front of the Sun. Mr. Stark, canon of Augsburg, reported this
observation, which is quoted by Le Verrier in Monthly Notices of the R.A.S., February
1877. It was "a well-defined round spot, about the size of Mercury, not to be seen the
same evening."

Source: "Observations of the transits of intra-mercurial planets or other bodies across the
Sun's disk," The Observatory 29 (1879): 136.
397.

Ca. 1820, Hopkinton, New Hampshire, USA
Close encounter
At dusk a young man was followed home in a patch of forest called "The Lookout" near
Putney Hill (also known as Gould Hill) for almost two miles by several glowing balls.
They would stop whenever he stopped to look back at them, and then resume their
movement as he started walking again, but never came closer than within 50 feet.
Such glowing balls had been seen in the area since 1750, moving slowly in mid-air,
so one may suspect a natural phenomenon. The date given here is a rough estimate.
Source: Charles Chase Lord, Life and Times in Hopkinton, N.H. (Concord, NH:
Republican Press Association, 1970).

398.
12 February 1820, Augsburg, Germany
Trans-solar traveler

A circular well-defined spot, with an orange-gold tint, not seen again the same evening, is
recorded to have been seen by two independent observers, viz. Stark and Steinhubel. It
crossed the sun in about 5 hours.
Source: R. C. Carrington, "On some previous observations of supposed planetary bodies

in transit over the Sun," Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 20 (March
1860): 192-4.

399.
27 May 1820, Spello (Perugia), Umbria, Italy
Unknown stars in a moving triangle CD
Half an hour before sunset, while Saint Caspar (San Gaspare Del Bufalo) was preaching in
the public square, people saw a cross of three stars in the sky to the east. It came over of
the head of the Servant of God and formed a triangle, "one (light) was up and the two side
ones at a lower level". Before this unusual phenomenon the people remained stunned;
many fell into deep commotion and even the Bishop, Monsignor Lucchesi, who was
present, "was astonished and amazed".
Some doubts can be expressed about the event. The correspondence of Gaspare has
been published yet the event is mentioned nowhere in his letters, even though we have
letters dated from multiple dates in May 1820. He sent two letters to his hierarchy on the
27th on the 28th of May, 1820, neither of which letters mention such an event.
212

Source: Biography of Saint Caspar (1786-1837). Despite featuring in UFO archives we
have yet to trace a source, though some reference to the event appears here: Gaspar Del
Bufalo, A close-up acquaintanceship. Depositions of V. Severini, G. Menicucci, B.
Panzini at the processes for the canonization of St. Gaspar Del Bufalo (Rome: Pia Unione
Preziosissimo Sangue, 1992), 49.

400.

7 September 1820, Embrun, France
Arago's unknown formation: Military precision
Astronomer Frangois Arago, director of Paris observatory, reports that "numerous people
have seen, during an eclipse of the moon, strange objects moving in straight lines.
They were equally spaced and remained in line when they made turns. Their
movements showed military precision."
Source: Frangois Arago, Oeuvres Completes de Frangois Arago (Paris, 1857), v. 11,
575-8; "Etoiles filantes en plein jour", in Annales de Chimie et de Physique, vol. 30
(1825): 575-8.

Fig. 35: French astronomer Francois Arago (1786-1853)
401.
13 February 1821, Paris, France: Luminous globe
People leaving a theatre observed a luminous globe in the air, which did not vanish until
daybreak. The translator notes sceptically that this comes from "a French publication, as
an example of the superstitious opinions which even in our times prevail to a considerable
degree, in an otherwise enlightened country."
Source: Adams Sentinel (Gettysburg, Pennsylvania), May 2nd 1821.

402.
23 October 1822, Buchholz, Germany: Two objects
Astronomer Pastorff sees two round spots passing in front of the Sun.

Source: "New Planets," Annual of Scientific Discovery (1860): 409-11, at 411.

403.
5 December 1822, Aberdeen, Scotland
Globular intruder
"Soon after six o'clock, a most extraordinary meteor was observed, almost due north from
Aberdeen. When first seen, it had the appearance of a large ball of the moon's diameter;
but descending towards the horizon, it formed the shape and appearance of a luminous
fiery pillar; soon after which it ascended, and assumed its original globular form - again
descended a little, and began to extend itself as before, when it suddenly vanished."

213

Source: The Edinburgh Advertiser, 10 December 1822.
22 May 1823, Hereford, England
Bright unknown near Venus

404.

Bright shining object observed near Venus, again reported by an experienced astronomer,
Reverend T. W. Webb.

Fig. 36: Reverend Webb
Reverend T.W. Webb was the author of Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes, a very
popular reference book for serious amateur astronomers.

Source: Nature 14: 195.
405.
12 August 1825, at sea near Hawaii, Pacific
Large red round object, wide illumination
English naturalist Andrew Bloxam and others saw a large red luminous object rise,
illuminating everything. It fell out of sight, rose and fell again: "About half past 3 o'clock
this morning the middle watch on deck was astonished to find everything around them
suddenly illuminated.
"Turning their eyes eastward they beheld a large, round, luminous body rising up
about 7 degrees apparently from the water to the clouds, and falling again out of sight, and

a second time rising and falling: it was the color of a red-hot [cannon] shot and appeared
about the size of the sun.. .It gave so great a light that a pin might be picked up on deck."

Source: The Diary ofAndrew Bloxam (Honolulu, 1925). As reported in UFO Investigator
(NICAP) 4, No. 5 (March 1968).

406.
1 April 1826, Saarbriicken, Germany: Gray object
A grayish object, whose size was evaluated at over 1 meter, rapidly approached the
ground with a sound like thunder and "expanded like a sheet."

Source: American Journal of Science and Arts 26 (July 1834): 133; The Quarterly Journal
of Science, Literature, and Art, by the Royal Institution of Great Britain 24 (July to Dec.

1827): 488; E.F.F. Chladni, "Ueber eine merkwurdige meteorische Erscheinung, am 1.
April 1826, nicht weit von Saarbriicken", in Annalen derPhysik 83, no. 7 (Leipzig, 1826):
372-377.

1827, Tietjerk, Friesland, Holland
Fiery man from the sky

407.

A man named Lieuwe Klaasens and a pastor saw a fireball land nearby, taking form as a
fiery man who flew up.

Source: Kornelius Ter Laan, Folkloristisch woordenboek van Nederland en Vlaams
Belgie, ('s-Gravenhage: G. B. Van Goor zonen, 1949).

408.
March 1828, Mount Wingen, Australia
Cigar-shaped object lands
A mysterious flying object was said to have descended upon Mount Wingen at the
Burning Mountain Nature Reserve. It was "cigar-shaped and had a funny silver colour"
and made a loud banging noise. According to the report, "when it landed it set fire to all
the vegetation and killed the cattle."
Allegedly, tall strangers appeared in the town at the same time. "They never said
anything but always pointed to the things they wanted."
The event must have caused quite a stir as the folk of Wingen began linking it with
strange disappearances among them: "Quite often people just disappeared and dogs and
domesticated animals disappeared too," wrote the informant, referring to the tale his
grandfather used to tell.

Source: Australian Post, June 17, 1989, and W. Chalker, Project 1947: Australian
Aboriginal Culture & Possible UFO Connections (1996).

409.
17 July 1829, Kensington, Pennsylvania, USA
Bright red object crossing the Delaware
Between 11 P.M. and midnight "a meteor of rather singular character" arose from the
neighbourhood of the Schuylkill, passed over Kensington and the river Delaware, and
disappeared behind the woods of Jersey.
"A long trail of light, like that of a shooting star was seen to follow it in the beginning
of its ascension; large sparkles that separated themselves from it and descended slowly,
were distinctly visible until hidden from view by the tops of the houses. Its motions were
rapid, irregular, and wavering, like the fluttering of a kite or the rocking of an air balloon.
"Its appearance was of a deep red colour, and remarkably brilliant, seemingly about
half the size of the moon. It arose until it crossed the Delaware, when it appeared but an
inconsiderable speck scarcely discernable, and then descended with astonishing velocity
until within a short distance of the horizon, where it remained stationary for a few
moments. "Suddenly it became exceedingly large and brilliant, sparkles again separated
from the main body, and descended as before. It soon after became dim and disappeared
behind the trees. Altogether, I should suppose it was visible about fifteen or twenty
minutes."
Source: Hazard's Register of Pennsylvania A, 3 (July 18, 1829): 48.
410.

23 July 1830, Whinny Park, near Cupar, Fife, Scotland
Two unknown flashing lights and a beam

215

As he was travelling from Auchtermuchty to Letham, reverend Alexander Espline noticed
a peculiar light hanging in the air above Whinny Park, the property of a wealthy man
named James Millie. As he came closer, Espline saw there were actually two lights of
unequal brilliance. The smaller one emitted a beam, after which both lights started
flashing. Scared by the display, Espline ran away. Two days later, the body of James
Millie was found near the site.
An extract from the Edinburgh Observer, published as a broadside, related that Millie
was a middle aged man living in a remote area in Whin (Whinny) Park near Cupar, and
was murdered sometime in June 1830 by his servant, John Henderson. Henderson was
arrested on Sunday 25 July, 1830. It is interesting that the light was not considered related
to the murder at the time. Indeed, it tells that "the path was so beaten that, but for an
accidental circumstance, the discovery would probably never have been made."
Flickering lights, often an ignis fatuus, emerge in many medieval stories to indicate a
burial or significant site.
Source: Elliot O'Donnell, Ghosts with a purpose (Rider, 1951); "Horrid murder! A full,
true and particular account of that most atrocious and horrid murder..." (1830), National
Library of Scotland, NLS F.3.a.l3 (108).

14 November 1832, Tyrol, Germany
Hovering object

411.

A ball of bright light accompanied by "falling stars" hovered for 15 minutes. Our primary
source is based on a letter received from Bruneck (Tyrol, Germany). While it is true the
phenomenon occurred at the usual time of the Leonids meteor shower, the event does not
naturally involve a ball of light suspended in the sky for a quarter of an hour, so the case
merits our attention.

Source: The Annual Register or a view of the History, Politics and Literature of the year
1832 (London, 1833): 444-445.

16 March 1833, North Carolina
A very slow "meteor" changes course

412.

At 6:35 P.M., during twilight, a man observed an object as bright as Venus, about the
same elevation but a little to the right of it. It was running in a northerly direction until it
changed course, running parallel to the horizon. It assumed a serpentine shape and became
stationary extending over 12 to 15 degrees and retaining its brilliance for about two
minutes. The witness reports: "It continued gradually to fade, appearing more and more
like a thin whitish cloud; and at 6:40 the last vestige of it disappeared, being visible just 5
minutes."
216

Source: Boston (Mass.) Investigator, 17 May 1833.

413.
13 November 1833, Niagara Falls, N.Y., USA
Hovering square
A large luminous square object was observed in the sky for an hour. It remained
stationary, and then went away slowly.

Source: American Journal of Science 25: 391.
.

1834, Cologne (Koln), Germany
Bright object splits in two

414

Bright object flying NE-N parallel to the horizon, reappeared and split in two.
Source: Frangois Arago, Astronomie Populaire, vol. IV (Paris, 1840): 266.
.

11 May 1835, Sicily, Italy
Astronomer's sighting

415

Unknown luminous object reported by astronomer Cacciatore. It was observed on four
consecutive days.
"Cacciatore noted what he first believed was an eighth magnitude star on May 11,
1835; but, with his next observation, on May 14, 1835, its position had changed relative to
another star, and he thought the object either a comet or planet beyond Uranus. Clouded
skies prevented further observations until June 2, 1835; but, by then, the object had been
lost."
Source: "Supposed new planet," American Journal of Science, S. 1, 31 (1837): 158-9, and
"Cacciatore's supposed planet of 1835," Nature 18 (July 4, 1878): 261.

6 October 1835, Cosenza, Italy
Maneuvering pyramid

416.

A pyramid-shaped meteor appears and heads off towards a mountain, leaving a "gloomy
tail." It first appeared as a lighted object seen flying West of Cosenza. It rose into the air
and changed shape, leaving a vaporous trail, moving slowly towards the south. It followed
a parabolic curve and disappeared towards Fiumefreddo harbor.
Source: "Casistica dei Fenomeni Straordinari" in Orizonti Sconosciuti 5, "Periodo:
1819-1857" (1976); Nicola Leoni, Delia Magna Grecia e delle tre Calabrie (Napoli,
1844), 325-326.

12 January 1836, Cherbourg, France
Spinning disk whistles

417.

A "luminous body, seemingly two-thirds the size of the moon" was witnessed at 6:30
P.M. "Central to it there seemed to be a dark cavity." The object was traveling at around
half a mile per second at an altitude of 1000 feet or so and seemed to rotate on its axis. It
cast shadows on the ground as it whistled past.
2

Source: Rept. British Assoc. for the Advancement of Science 77 (1860). The object was not
4

doughnut-shaped' as many have written.

1 July 1836, Szeged, Hungary
Light globes and a lady in white

418.

Globular lights, poltergeist effects and apparitions of an entity resembling "a lady in
white" and a dwarf-sized Franciscan monk. The case mainly concerns a so-called haunted
house and objects being thrown around by unseen hands. Such manifestations are not
uncommon in ufological literature and have been related by some researchers to the
abduction phenomenon.

Source: The story comes from a letter by a Dr. V. Stantsky which was sent to Justinius
Kerner and published in the latter's periodical: Magikon, Archive fiir beobachtungen aus

dem Gebiete der Geisterkunde und des magnetischen und magischen Lebens, vol. 3

(Stuttgart, 1846), 223-237; William Howitt, "Throwing of Stones and Other Substances by
Spirits," The Spiritual Magazine, vol. VI, 3 (Feb. 1865): 55-56.

8 July 1836, Saratov Province, Russia
Hovering globe

419.

At 10 P.M. there appeared, almost on the horizon to the north, a globe-shaped whitish
mass as large as the moon; for several minutes it hovered in the air, after which it slowly
descended to the ground and disappeared, leaving a zigzag trail.
Source: Mikhail Gershtein, Potu storonu NLO (Beyond the other side of UFOs) (Moscow:
Dilya ed., 2002), 159, citing Utkin S.NLO 200 let nazad? (UFO 200 years ago?) in the
newspaper Zarya Molodezhi, Saratov, 3 Feb. 1990.

420.
1 November 1836, Buchholz, Germany
Unexplained objects
Two unexplained objects crossing the face of the sun, reported by astronomer Pastorff:
they were of unequal size, changing position relative to each other.

Source: Annual of Scientific Discovery (1860): 410.
1837, Scarborough, England
Frightening lights at ground level

421.

By a clear starlight night Mr. White, chief officer of the preventive service of the
Scarborough station ("a most respectable authority") was proceeding from his house to a
cliff where one of his men, named Trotter, had the lookout.
According to a letter from his son to a science magazine, "He passed a plantation in
his way, in which he heard a loud crash among the trees, as if it had been the fall of an
aerolite (...) He saw before him what he thought were balls of fire, about the size of an
orange, appearing and disappearing with an undulating motion, about five or six feet from
the ground; not accompanied by any noise, nor did they move over the hedges; but he
observed other luminous appearances shooting across the road and sky, emitting a hissing
noise like a rocket, but not so loud.
"The same appearances (particularly the latter) had so frightened the man, that he had
actually hid himself for fear of them."
218

Source: The Magazine of Natural History (Longman, Orme, Brown, Green and
Longmans, 1837): 550-551.
422.

16 February 1837, Buchholz, Germany
Uncorrelated planetoid
Another unexplained object crossing the face of the sun, reported by astronomer Pastorff.
Source: Annual of Scientific Discovery for I860 (Boston, 1867): 410.
423.
29 August 1837, Tirgu-Neamt, Romania
Luminous sphere
During the night a luminous sphere was observed by local people. It came closer to the
ground at dawn, illuminating the fields with an intense reddish glow.
Source: Albina Romaneasca, 2 Sept. 1837.
424.
1838, India, location unknown: Disk with appendage
A flying disk, about the apparent size of the moon but brighter, from which projected a
hook-shaped appendage, was reported by G. Pettitt. It was visible about 20 minutes.

Source: Baden Powell. "A catalogue of observations of luminous meteors," Annual Report

of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1849): 1-53, at 2, 44.

425.
2 October 1839, Rome, Italy: Unidentified planet
Astronomer De Cuppis of the Royal College: unknown body similar to a planet passes in
front of the sun. This is one of the main observations selected by Le Verrier to compute
his orbit of Vulcan. The object was "a perfectly round and defined spot, moving at such a
rate that it would cross the sun in about 6 hours."
Source: E. Dunkin, "The suspected Intra-Mercurial planet." Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 37 (February 1877): 229-30.

426.
9 April 1843, Greenville, Tennessee, USA
Lighthouses in the sky
According to the Greenville (Tennessee) Miscellany
"About eight o'clock, there was seen in the south-western sky a luminous ball, to
appearance two feet in circumference, constantly emitting small meteors from one or the
other side of it. It appeared in brightness to outrival the great luminary of day.
"On its first appearance it was stationary one or two minutes, then, as quick as
thought, it rose apparently thirty feet, and paused - then fell to the point from whence it
2

had started, and continued to perform this motion for about fifteen times. Then it moved
horizontally about the same distance, and for nearly the same space of time. At length it
assumed its first position; then rose again perpendicularly about twelve feet, and remained
somewhat stationary, continuing to grow less for an hour and a quarter, when it entirely
disappeared."

Source: Brother Jonathan, Vol. 5:2 (May 13, 1843): 55.

427.
3 October 1843, Warwick, Ontario, Canada
Flying men
Charles Cooper, a farmer, saw something strange crossing the sky in the middle of the
afternoon:

"On the third day of October, as I was labouring in the field, I saw a remarkable
rainbow, after a slight shower of rain. Soon after, the bow passed away and the sky
became clear, and I heard a distant rumbling sound resembling thunder. I laid by my
work, and looked towards the west from whence the sound proceeded, but seeing nothing
returned to my labour.
"The sound continued to increase until it became very heavy, and seemed to
approach nearer. I again laid by my work, and looking towards the west once more, to
ascertain its cause, I beheld a cloud of very remarkable appearance approaching, and
underneath it, the appearance of three men, perfectly white, sailing through the air, one

following the other, the foremost one appearing a little the latest. My surprise was great,
and concluding that I was deceived, I watched them carefully.
"They still approached me underneath the cloud, and came directly over my head, a
little higher up than the tops of the trees, so that I could view every feature as perfectly as
of one standing directly before me. I could see nothing but a mi Iky-white body, with
extended arms, destitute of motion, while they continued to utter doleful moans, which, I
found as they approached, to be the distant roar that first attracted my attention. These
moans sounded much like Wo-Wo-Wo! I watched them until they passed out of sight. The
effect can be better imagined than described. Two men were labouring at a distance, to
whom I called to see the men in the air; but they say they did not see them. I never
believed in such an appearance until that time. "
Source: Eli Curtis, Wonderful Phenomena (New York, 1850).

4 October 1844, location unknown
Unknown planetoid

428.

Astronomer Glaisher: A luminous object as bright as Jupiter, "sending out quick flickering
waves of light."

Source: "Astronomical puzzle," John Timbs' Year-Book of Facts in Science and Art
(1843): 278.

29 March 1845, London, England
Orange object, hovering

429.

At 11 P.M. Mr. Goddart observed an unusual object and reported it to an English journal:
"The sky was perfectly clear and the stars sparkled (...) My attention was suddenly
diverted by a weak light in the constellation of Canes Venatici, resembling a speck of fog
about 4 in magnitude but clearly of a yellow color. I immediately pointed my telescope
toward it, which gives small but very clear and bright vision. The meteor appeared as a
fog of four stars, with the center of an orange color. From Alpha Can.Ven. it moved
slowly towards Coma Berenices, gaining ever more brilliance. It took two minutes before
it went out."

Source: L 'institutJournal general des societes et travaux scientifiques de la France et de
I'etranger. lere section, Sciences mathematlques, physiques et naturelles, vol. 13, no. 590
(Paris, 1845): 148. There is a reference to this observation in Poggendorf's catalog in

Annalen der Physik und Chemle (1854).

430.
11 May 1845, Capodimonte Observatory, Naples, Italy
Black objects
Astronomer Schumacher wrote to Gauss on 18 September 1845: "Erman sends me a
report of Capocci about bodies which he has seen pass in front of the sun on 11 to 13

May." Ernesto Capocci (1798-1864) was an Italian astronomer. Heinrich Christian
Schumacher (1780-1850) was the founder of Astronomische Nachtrichten.
Source: Correspondence between mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss and astronomer
Schumacher. Briefwechselzwischen C.F. Gauss und H.C. Schumacher, edited by C.A.F.
Peters, vol. 5 (Altona, 1863), 46-47; Report of the nineteenth meeting of the British

Association for the Advancement of Science (year 1849) (London, 1850): 46.
431.
18 June 1845, between Malta and Turkey
Three luminous objects rise from the sea

"At 9:30 P.M. the brig Victoria, from Newcastle to Malta, in lat. 36° 40' 56", long. 13°
44' 36" was becalmed, with no appearance of bad weather; when her top-gallant and royal
masts suddenly went over the side as if carried away by a squall. Two hours it blew very
hard from the east; and whilst all hands were aloft reefing topsails, it suddenly fell calm
again, and they felt an overpowering heat and stench of sulphur. At this moment three

luminous bodies issued from the sea, about half a mile from the vessel, and remained

visible for ten minutes. Soon after it began to blow hard again, and the vessel got into a
current of cold fresh air."
The geographic coordinates given in the report would place the ship 900 miles away
from Antalya in Turkey.

Source: "Malta Mail", cited by London Times, 18 August 1845, and James Glaisher, et al.
"Report on observations of luminous meteors, 1860-1861." Annual Report of the British

Association for the Advancement of Science (1861): 1-44, at 30.
432.
18 June 1845, Ainab Mountain, Lebanon
Two large unknowns

"At Ainab, on Mount Lebanon, at half an hour after sunset, the heavens presented an
extraordinary and beautiful though awful spectacle." Witnesses described the phenomenon
as "composed of two large bodies, each apparently at least 5 times larger than the moon,
with streamers or appendages from each joining the two, and looking precisely like large
flags blown out by a gentle breeze." They appeared in the west, remaining visible for an
hour, taking an easterly course, and gradually disappeared.
"The appendages appeared to shine from the reflected light of main bodies, which it
was painful to look at for any time. The moon has risen about half an hour before, and
there was scarcely any wind."
This phenomenon may well have been related to the first sighting for this date, above.
Source: James Glaisher, et al. "Report on observations of luminous meteors, 1860-1861,"

Annual Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, (1861): 1-44.
7 June 1846, Darmstadt, Germany
Slag residue falling

433.

An object falling from the sky is found to be "only slag." In several well-attested modern
cases when an unknown flying object dropped some molten metal, the residue was also
found to be "nothing but slag," So while not representing an important sighting, the report
should not be summarily discounted and we include it for its possible physical relevance
Source: James Glaisher et al. "Report on observations of luminous meteors, 1866-67."

Annual Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1867): 288-430,
at 416.

25 August 1846, Saint-Apre, France
Bright globe emits 'stars'

434.

At 2:30 A.M. Dr. Moreau was returning from a visit to a patient's home by warm, calm
weather when he found himself bathed in the light coming from a globe that seemed to
open up, emitting hundreds of star-like objects. This was observed for three to four
minutes, after which the display slowed down and the globe disappeared.

Source: "Sur un meteore lumineux," Comptes-Rendus de lAcademie des Sciences 23
(Paris, 1846): 549-550.

435.

19 September 1846, La Salette, France
Brilliant light and apparition
Two cowherds, an eleven year old boy, Maximin, and a fourteen year old girl, Melanie
Calvat, saw a sudden flash of light. She testified:

"I could see our cows grazing peacefully and I was on my way down, with Maximin
on his way up, when all at once I saw a beautiful light shining more brightly than the sun.
'Maximim, do you see what is over there? Oh! My God!' At the same moment, I dropped
the stick I was holding. Something inconceivably fantastic passed through me in that
moment, and I felt myself being drawn. I felt great respect, full of love, and my heart beat
faster. I kept my eyes firmly fixed on this light, which was static, and as if it had opened
up, I caught sight of another, much more brilliant light which was moving, and in this
light I saw a most beautiful lady. "

The "lady" was dressed in white and gold, with a cap of roses on her head. She was
surrounded by a brilliant light and was weeping. The lady complained that Sunday was
being desecrated and the peasants were blaspheming the saints in swearing. (The Cure
d'Ars and other clergy were complaining about these very sins in their sermons). If there
was no amendment, there would be great disaster, the harvest would fail and people would
starve
The parish priest declared the lady to be the Blessed Virgin; the apparitions were later
approved by the Bishop of Grenoble, and pilgrimages began. Melanie became a nun and
continued to receive revelations. Maximin tried unsuccessfully to become a priest but
Source: Melanie wrote down her testimony in 1878. On 15 Nov. 1879 it was published
with the "Imprimatur" of the Bishop of Lecce. In 1904, a few weeks before her death, it
was reprinted "ne varietur" at Lyon.

436.
November 1846, Rangoon River, China
Light beam and extreme heat
By a dark night, at about 7:30 P.M., a bright light appeared, accompanied by extreme heat,
and moved rapidly in front of the ship where the witness, (the wife of the ship's owner)
was standing with the captain and a 4 year old child.
The light did not come as a bolt of lightning but rather as a compact flame that
terrified the witnesses. Several people in the vicinity felt the sudden increase in heat,
although they were not in a position to see the light.

Source: Collingwood, Philosoph. Magazine, and L'Institut, 29 April 1868, 144.
437.
19 March 1847, Holloway, London, England
Unknown object ascending
"On the evening of Friday, March 19, "A" and I left Albion road, [Holloway], about halfpast eight. Not any stars were then visible, but when we were in Highbury place, "A"
called my attention to what we thought a fire-balloon ascending slowly. It was in the west,
a little inclining to the south. As it passed on slowly to the west, its intense brilliance
convinced me that it was not an earthly thing.
"When it appeared to be over Hampstead (but as high in the heavens as the sun is at
six o'clock in the evening when the days are longest) it shot forth several fiery
coruscations, and whilst we were gazing at it broke into an intensely radiant cloud: this

cloud sailed on slowly, and we never took our eyes off it. At this time the stars were
shining. When we were in the gravel path opposite to Highbury terrace, the cloud was
higher in the heavens and more to the west. It cast a most brilliant light on the houses
there, brighter than moonlight, and unlike any light I ever saw. It appeared of a blue tint
on the bricks, but there was no blue light in the cloud itself.
"Suddenly, over the radiant cloud appeared another cloud still more brilliant, but I
now felt so awe-struck, that I cannot say precisely how long they hung one over the other
before the most wonderful sight happened. Perhaps they remained so for two or three
minutes, when from the upper cloud a small fiery ball (about the size that the largest
planets appear to the naked eye) dropped into the lower cloud, and was instantly absorbed.
Soon after, another similar ball dropped from the upper to the lower cloud and then a ball
apparently four or five times the size of the two preceding, fell from one cloud to the
other.
"Shortly after this both clouds disappeared, apparently absorbed in the heavens,
though I did see a few particles of the brilliant clouds floating about for a minute or so.
Presently the moon appeared, considerably to the northward of the place where the clouds
had hung. We then saw the bright light across the heavens, which you told me, was
zodiacal light, which lasted for more than an hour."
224

Source: "Meteoric Stones," The Living age, vol. 56, No. 717 (Feb 20, 1858), 503. Also

Excelsior: Helps to Progress in Religion, Science and Literature, vol. V (London: James

Nisbetand Co., 1856).

11 October 1847, Bonn, Germany
Fast-moving intruder

438.

Single object, a small black spot rapidly crossing the disk of the sun, reported by
astronomer Schmidt.
It was "neither a bird nor an insect crossing before the telescope."
Source: R. C. Carrington, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 20 (January
1860): 100-1.
439.
19 November 1847, Oxford, Wytham Park, England
A large object makes two stops
A large object reported by Mr. Symonds was stationary at two points of its trajectory,
which took seven minutes.
Source: Report of the eighteenth meeting of the British Association for the Advancement ol
Science (year 1848) (London, 1849): 9-10.
440.
1848, Arabian Sea, Arabia: Two wheels at sea
A ship at sea was approached by two "rolling wheels" that exploded with a crashing
sound:

"Sir W. S. Harris read a report from a ship towards which two fiery wheels described
as rolling haystacks on fire had whirled. When they came close there was a horrible crack
as two masts had ruptured under a violent shaking. A strong odor of sulphur was noted."
Source: Mentioned in GEPA Bulletin, new series no. 2 (Feb. 1965), 17, the original source
was The Athenaeum, no. 1086 (19 August, 1848).
441.
9 March 1848, Oxford, Wytham Park, England
Unidentified celestial body
Single unidentified object reported by Mr. Symonds.
Source: Report of the eighteenth meeting of the British Association for the Advancement
Science (year 1848) (London, 1849): 10.
442.
4 September 1848, Nottingham, England
Slow celestial object
At 8:59 P.M. Mr. Lowe observed an unidentified object from Highfield Observatory. The
bright star-like source moved from Eta of Antinoiis to Pi of Sagittarius. It covered this

distance in no less than 45 seconds, much too slow for a meteor. Its intensity was
estimated at six times the brilliance of Jupiter.
Source: Report of luminous meteors of the British astronomical association, 1849, quoted
by Flammarion in Bradytes, op. cit.
443.
18 September 1848, Inverness, Scotland
High velocity objects
Two large, bright lights that looked like stars were seen in the sky. Sometimes they were
stationary, but occasionally they moved at high velocity.
Source: The Times, 19 Sept. 1848.
5 February 1849, Deal, Kent, England
Two dark objects

444.

Two dark objects seen crossing the disk of the sun by an observer named Brown.

Source: E. J. Lowe, "Meteors, or falling stars," Recreative Science 1 (1860): 130-8, at
138.

445.

13 February 1849, Reims, France
Star moving in the sky with sudden accelerations
Skilled amateur observer Coulvier-Gravier observed an unusual "star" at 7:30 P.M. It was
a 3rd magnitude object first seen in the vicinity of Delta Cephei. It moved through a
course of 20 degrees in the sky, with sudden accelerations and stops ("saccades").
Source: Remi Armand Coulvier-Gravier, Recherches sur les Meteores (Paris: MalletBachelier, 1859), 292.

446.
12 March 1849, location unknown: Sighting of Vulcan
Astronomer Sidebotham reports an object crossing the disk of the sun. This is one of the
observations judged reliable enough by Le Verrier to compute his orbit of Vulcan, the
supposed intra-mercurial planet.
Source: E. Dunkin. "The suspected Intra-Mercurial planet," Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 37 (February 1877): 229-30.

447

4 April 1849, Delhi, India: Very slow object
An extremely slow object was seen in the sky, dimming and brightening.
Source: Report of the twentieth meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science (year 1850) (London, 1851): 129.
14 October 1849, Athens, Greece
Unknown celestial object

448

Astronomer Schmidt reports an unknown celestial object crossing the disk of the sun.

226

Source: E. Ledger, "Observations or supposed observations of the transits of intramercurial planets or other bodies across the Sun's disk," Observatory 3 (1879-80): 135-8,
at 137.
15 January 1850, Cherbourg, France
Light, swinging motion

449

About 7:45 P.M., by snowy weather, a bright light appeared above the trees. It was
observed by Mr. Fleury, swinging about its base, which was in line with the horizon. It
scintillated, seemed ready to disappear, then was reignited and finally disappeared. Small
flashes continued to be seen, moving south.

Source: Camille Flammarion, Bolides Inexpliques par leur aspect bizarre et la lenteur de
leurparcours - Bradytes, citing Sestier, La Foudre et ses formes, T.I., 205.
450.
5 February 1850, Sandwich, Kent, England
Slow-moving "red-hot iron ball"
At 6:50 P.M. according to Mr. W. H. Weekes, a small luminous object appeared stationary
near Orion and approached slowly on a straight line, growing to one third the apparent
diameter of the moon. It went from a speck of light to a "red-hot iron ball," hovered for
about three minutes and disappeared in a shower of fire. The object had remained
stationary for 1 min 45 seconds, then moved horizontally for a full 45 seconds.

Source: Report of the British Astronomical Association (1851): 1-52 at 2-3, 38, and Baden
Powell, On Observations of luminous meteors, op. cit.
451.
18 February 1850, Athens, Greece: Solar intruder

An unknown body was seen passing in front of the Sun. It was observed and reported by
astronomer Schmidt.
Source: R. C. Carrington, "In the 10th number of Professor Wolf's Mittheilungen iiber die
Sonnenflecken..." Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 20 (January 1860):
100-1.
13 March 1850, Paris, France
A flying object reverses course

452.

Mr. Goulvier-Gravier, founder of a private observatory dedicated to meteoritics, observed
a magnitude 3 "shooting star" that came from the southeast and reversed course at 4:45
A.M.
Source: Goulvier-Gravier, Recherches sur les Meteores (Paris: Mallet-Bachelier, 1859),
figure 88 on page 300.
453.
3 October 1850, Talcot Mt., near Hartford, CT, USA
Maneuvering object

According to a paper read by Professor Brocklesby before the American Association in
1851, an observer named Graylord Wells, who was on the eastern slope of Talcot
Mountain saw an unidentified object:
"The evening was clear and the moon near the meridian, when Mr. Wells saw, a little
south of west, and full 60 degrees above the horizon, a bright meteor apparently a foot in
diameter. It shone with an orange hue, and below was a train which seemed to be 15 or 16
feet in length, fan-shaped, and possessing an apparent breath at its further extremity of two
feet. The meteor rose from east to west with a slow and steady motion, and in its progress
passed above or to the north of the moon. And when it had arrived on the eastern side,
directly turned toward the southeast, and dropping below the moon, a part of its attendant
train swept over the lunar disk."
The phenomenon gradually descended to the horizon in the southeast. The observer
stated that this could not have lasted less than three minutes in moving the length of its
train, and that the time of its visibility "could not possibly have been less than an hour,
and was probably an hour and a half."
227

Source: The Ohio Journal of Education 2 (Dec. 1853): 411
454.

10 October 1852. Reims, France
Wandering "star" makes a 90 degree turn
M.Coultier-Gravier, observing the sky from his private observatory to compile statistics
on shooting stars, recorded an unusual "meteor" at 8 P.M. It was a third-degree object first

seen near "nu" of Capricorn. It described a 30-degree trajectory in the sky, changing its
direction from northwest to southwest.
Source: Coultier-Gravier, op. cit., 306 and fig. 97.

455.
1853, Paris, France: Red disk on slow trajectory
A witness named Amede Guillemin, who lived on Rue Arnelot, observed an object moving
extremely slowly, horizontally above Pere-Lachaise cemetery. The object was "a pale red
disk."
Source: Flammarion, Bradytes, op. cit., 155.

456.
22 May 1854, unknown location: Multiple unknowns
A contributor named R. P. Greg reports that a friend of his saw an object equal in size to
Mercury in the vicinity of that planet, and behind it an elongated object, and "behind that
something else, smaller and round."

Source: Baden Powell "Report on observations of luminous meteors, 1854-55," Annual

Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1855): 79-100, at 94.
457.
21 January 1855, New Haven, Connecticut
Another red object

228

About 10 P.M. a man saw a brilliant red ball about two minutes in diameter, first visible
about eight degrees below the guards in Ursa Minor. It seemed stationary at first, but in
about fifteen seconds commenced moving slowly towards the east in an almost horizontal
line, with what seemed like a slight undulatory motion. It passed below and about one
degree from the star Benetuash in Ursa Major and disappeared in the distance, not far
from Denebola in the constellation Leo. The observation had lasted ten minutes. The
writer adds: "there was no explosion, nor was any scintillation thrown off at any time."

Source: New Haven Palladium, 23 January 1855.
458.
11 June 1855, Bonn, Germany: Dark unknown body
A dark body was seen crossing the disk of the sun. It was reported by astronomers Ritter
and Schmidt.

Source: E. Ledger, "Observations or supposed observations of the transits of intraMercurial planets or other bodies across the Sun's disk," Observatory 3 (1879-80): 135-8,
at 137.

459.
11 August 1855, Tillington, Sussex, England
Red wheel in the sky
At 11:30 P.M. a Mrs. Ayling and other witnesses watched in awe as a red wheel-like
object with spokes emerged from behind some hills and remained visible in the sky for an
hour and a half.
Source: Baden Powell, "Report on observations of luminous meteors, 1855-56," Annual

Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1856): 53-62, at 54-55.
460.
10 December 1855, Copenhagen, Denmark
Unexplained object
An object varying in size from the apparent diameter of the sun to that of a star was visible
in the south-western atmosphere for 10 to 12 minutes. It "changed its configuration
several times, having appeared now in one mass, then in two, then again in three, and so
forth alternately, lighting up the heavens to a considerable distance."

Source: Copenhagen Faedrelandet, quoted by the Manchester Guardian of 5 January,
1856, under the heading "Prussia, from our own correspondent."

461.
1858, Jay, Ohio, USA: Silent vessel with passengers
Alerted by a sudden shadow over the place where they were standing, several witnesses
including Mr. Henry Wallace are said to have looked up in time to see "a large and
curiously constructed vessel, not over one hundred yards from the earth." A number of
very tall people were seen aboard this craft, which the recorder of the event believes was
"a vessel from Venus, Mercury, or the planet Mars, on a visit of pleasure or exploration,
or some other cause."
Mr. Wallace reportedly added: "The vessel was evidently worked by wheels and
other mechanical appendages, all of which worked with a precision and a degree of beauty
never yet attained by any mechanical skill upon this planet (...) This was no phantom that
disappeared in a twinkling...but this aerial ship was guided, propelled and steered through
the atmosphere with the most scientific system and regularity, about six miles an hour,
though, doubtless, from the appearance of her machinery, she was capable of going
thousands of miles an hour."
Author Jesse Glass rediscovered the book containing this report and claimed he found
evidence at the Ohio Historical Society regarding the existence of a man named Henry
Wallace in Jay, Ohio at the time.
Research by C. Aubeck disclosed that there was indeed a Post Office at Jay from
March 14th 1839 to March 23rd 1842, but its whereabouts had become unknown shortly
afterwards. Indeed, the town did not figure in any gazetteer or Erie County history.
Aubeck managed to pinpoint the location of Jay from comments made by the historian
229

Henry Timman in his popular weekly column, Just Like Old Times. It was, he said, "on
the township line between Milan and Huron" but nothing marks the spot today. According
to census records a Henry C. Wallace lived in nearby Erie County in 1850, a fifteen year
old lad from New York. By 1860 he must have either died or moved on, because he is not
listed again in the state of Ohio. This Mr. Wallace was too young to have lived in Jay and
in fact was registered as a resident of Florence, a different township.
We can only conclude that the claim rests on the veracity of names that cannot be
verified today.

Source: Dr. William Earl, The Illustrated Silent Friend, embracing subjects never before
scientifically discussed (New York, 1858).

462.
26 March 1859, Orgeres, France: Sighting of Vulcan
Mr. Lescarbault, an amateur astronomer, has observed a body of planetary size crossing
the disk of the sun. He wrote to Le Verrier, who came to Orgeres to meet with him and to
verify the records of the observation in view of computing an orbit for Vulcan, the intra
mercurial planet which he hypothesized. In his letter, Lescarbault wrote:

230

Fig. 37: French astronomer Urbain Le Verrier, discoverer of Neptune
"The duration of the passage of the new planet was one hour seventeen minutes, and
twenty seconds of sidereal time. I have the conviction that, some day, a black dot,
perfectly circular, very small, will be seen again passing in front of the sun (...) This
object must be the planet or one of the planets whose existence in the vicinity of the solar
globe you have announced a few months ago, Mr. Director, using this same wonderful
power of computation that made you recognize the existence of Neptune in 1846. "
Source: L Annee Scientifique (1878): 16.
29 January 1860, London, England
Unknown planetoid

463.

An unknown object of planetary size is reported by Mr. Russell and three other observers.

Source: F. A. R. Russell, "An Intra-Mercurial planet," Nature 14 (October 5, 1876): 505.

464.
1 March 1860, Moscow, Russia: Unexplained sky object
At 9:45 P.M. "a star to the southwest of the Great Bear suddenly commenced to wax
larger, assuming at the same time the color of iron at a red heat, but without the
appearance of any sparks or rays." It was observed in this condition until 11:30 P.M.,
growing to half the size of the moon. It then became dimmer, and by midnight it had
disappeared. In its stead "a sort of black speck was to be noticed by the light of the other
stars."
The writer adds: "It remains for the astronomers to describe, and poets to sing, the
destruction of the luminary, which, for ought we know, may have been the abode of a race
superior to our own."
Source: The Russian correspondent of the London Telegraph, quoted in The Banner of
Liberty (Middletown, New York), 6 June 1860.

465.
17 July 1860, Dharamsala, India: Lights in the heavens
On the evening of the day when a remarkable meteor had fallen in the area, a man who
was observing the sky about 7 P.M. saw a pattern of lights, each lasting for one minute or
more, over places where there were no houses or roads:

"Some were high up in the air moving like fire balloons, but the greater part of them
were in the distance in the direction of the lower hills in front of my house, others were
closer to the house and between Sir Alexander Lawrence's and the Barracks. I am sure
from some which I observed closely that they were neither fire baloons (sic), lanterns nor
bonfires, nor any other thing of that sort, but bona fide lights in the heavens. Though I
have made enquiries among the Natives the next day, I have never been able to find out
what they were or the cause of their appearance."

231

Source: The Canadian Journal of Industry, Science and Art, Canadian Institute
(1849-1914), vol 7 (1862): 197.

466.
24 September 1860, Nebraska City, USA Three unexplained objects in apparent
formation
After sunset Mr. Joel Draper and ferryman Mr. Beebout saw a bright object low in the
West. "While gazing with amazement at that, which in size, color, brightness and shape
resembled one-fourth of the sun taken from its edge, we soon discovered another spot
further to the right and a little higher, which was about one-third the size of the first; then
another directly above the first, one-third the size of the second. All of these we soon
discovered to be moving towards the south, or to the left of their former position, with
great rapidity (...) as they moved, they all retained the same relation to each other as when
they first appeared."
The account goes on: "This took place after sunset, but, by means of the brightness of
these bodies, it was as light as some ten or fifteen minutes before sunset. There were no

clouds or vapors in the sky in that direction. They could not have been sun dogs or mock
suns, for (such phenomena) remain, as long as they continue, in the same relative position
to the sun."

Source: Brooklyn Daily Eagle, 12 October 1860.
467.
10 November 1860, Washington, D.C., USA
Three unknown objects flying over the Capital
Just about sunset several witnesses observed an object "the size of a balloon" moving with
great rapidity in a south-westerly direction: "Notwithstanding the light of day was still
strong and clear, the illumination of the object was brilliant and distinct (...) We heard,
while gazing at this wonder, that two similar ones had passed previously. The one we saw,
after moving south-westerly, at an angle with the path of the sun, took a course directly
west, and straight from us; fading gradually and very rapidly until lost from sight.
Source: Washington D.C. Herald and Brooklyn Eagle, front page, Friday 16 November.
1860.

468.
1861, North Atlantic Ocean: Three luminous bodies

232

Three luminous bodies are reported to have come from the North Atlantic Ocean and
stayed in view for no less than ten minutes during a squall.
Source: "A Catalogue of Observations of Luminous Meteors," Report of the British

Association, 1861.

4 October 1861, New York, USA
Mysterious object with occupants

469.

About 6 P.M. a "mysterious balloon" passed over the city, with two men in it, from west
to east at great height. Witnesses speculated that it was either " in the service of the
traitors" or that it was "a device built by Professor Lowe, which had parted its fastenings,"
both impossible explanations.

Source: The New York Times, 5 October, 1861.
470.
12 August 1863, Madrid, Spain: Maneuvering object
"The night before last there was observed on the horizon a luminous body that appeared
towards the east, and it was promptly thought to be a comet. Its colour was reddish, and on

the top part there could be seen an appendix or crown, that was doubtlessly ablaze. It was
stationary for a long time; but later it began to move quickly in different directions:
horizontally, rising, and lowering."
The comet hypothesis is not tenable in this case.
Source: Gaceta de Madrid, 14 August 1863 (issue 226). Recorded by Franck Marie and
Daniel Villain archives. Cited by Charles Garreau in Alerte dans le Ciel, 142.

471.
1 November 1864, Florence, Italy: Hovering white globe
"A white globe of fire many times larger than the full moon seemed hanging almost
motionless in the air." Shades of orange and blue passed over its surface. After a full
minute it suddenly disappeared, vanishing on the spot. The witness adds: "Only just
before its disappearance a smaller ball was seen immediately below it, of a fiery orange
colour, the first one appearing at that moment of the same hue."
Source: Madame Baldelli, "Large Fireball," Astronomical Register 3(1865): 53.

4 December 1867, Chatham, England
A group of black disks

472.

"On the afternoon of Monday the 4 , between the hours of 3 and 4,1 witnessed a very
extraordinary sign in the heavens...The facts are as follows: I was passing the Mill by the
water-works reservoir. On the gallery I observed the miller uttering exclamations of
surprise, and looking earnestly towards the west. On inquiring what took his attention so
much, he said: 'Look, sir, I never saw such a sight in my life!'
"On turning in the direction towards which he was looking, the west, I also was
astounded—numberless black disks in groups and scattered were passing rapidly through
the air. He said his attention was directed to it by his little girl, who called to him in the
Mill, saying, 'Look, father, here are a lot of balloons coming!'
"They continued for more than 20 minutes, the time I stayed. In passing in front of
the sun they appeared like large cannon shot. Several groups passed over my head,
disappearing suddenly, and leaving puffs of grayish brown vapor very much like smoke.
"I am, sir, your truly, James E. Beveridge, Darland, Chatham."
th

Source: Letter to the editor of Chatham News and Symonds' Monthly Meteorological
Magazine (Dec. 1867): 8.

473.
8 June 1868, Radcliffe Observatory, Oxford, England
Unknown astronomical body
Astronomers recorded, at 9:50 P.M., a luminous object that moved quickly across the sky,
stopped, changed course to the west, then to the south, where it hovered for four minutes
before heading north.

Source: "Remarkable meteor" English Mechanic! (July 10, 1868): 351.

474.
25 July 1868, Parrammatta, NSW, Australia
Flying ark, spirit voices, strange formulas, abduction CD
The following account, based upon a transcript of a manuscript that has never been
located, must be taken with great caution. It purports to tell the story of Mr. Frederick
William Birmingham, an engineer and local council alderman, who saw what he described
as an "Ark" as he was standing under the verandah of his rented cottage in Duck's Lane
and looked up to the sky:
"While looking at it (...) I said to myself aloud 'Well that is a beautiful vessel', I had
no sooner ended the sentence than I was made aware that I was not alone, for, to my right
hand and a little to the rear of my frontage a distinct voice said, slowly, 'That's a machine
to go through the air'- in a little time I replied 'it appears to me more like a vessel for
going upon the water, but, at all events, it's the loveliest thing I ever saw.' During this part
of the conversation the machine made three courses: the first a level, the second a rapid
backward descent, and the third left descent, but with a forward and curved easterly
movement."
Birmingham's description goes on:
"The machine then quite stopped the forward motion and descended some twenty feet
or so as gently as a feather on to the grass [and] showed its bottom partially, its side fully,
and a half front section or view, its peculiar shapings are well impressed upon my mind
and the colour seemed to blend with faint, flitting shades of steel blue, below, and
appearing tremulous and like what one might term, magnified scales on a large fish, the
234

latter being as it were flying in the air. The machine has not the shape of anything that has
life."
This observation led to a classic contact or abduction scenario:
"Shortly after my declaring it was the loveliest thing I ever saw-the spirit said to me
'Have you a desire or do you wish to enter upon it?' I replied Yes, - 'then come' - said the
spirit, thereupon we were lifted off the grass and gently carried through the air and onto
the upper part of the machine, which was about 20 yards distant from where we were
standing - (the spirit appeared like a neutral tint shade and the shape of man in his usual
frock dress). While I stood on the machine the spirit moved to a cylinder pointing and
indicating its purposes by downward motion of hand then made sign (that another and
similar, was beyond and back of the Pilot house - as I term a part of the machine) which
former I could not from my position see - the spirit then went further to the right two steps
or so and went down in the machine to his waist returned to me and while passing on one
side going to the rear of the machine the spirit - en passant - and making a sign, pointing,
said 'step in' and I partly turned in the direction indicated to me I saw steps (three, I think)
steep ones. I stepped down into the - let me call it - 'Pilot house' which had a floor about
three and one half feet lower than the first or upper floor it was enclosed at the sides, end
and top and only open in front, and nothing was in the Pilot house that I could discern but
a table with passage all around it, and this table or bench seemed covered all round its
sides and top alike a solid or at all events a thing about five feet long or so, and 3 1/2
broad and 2 1/2 feet high covered like with oil skin or something of that sort, or perhaps
iron covered with rubber cloth tightly-the side spaces round it were about 2 feet wide and
everything appeared very strong, the sides I noticed (when about 'stepping in') were
extremely thick, about six inches - and I wondered why they were so strong in a machine
to go through the air.
"I was now alone in the machine at the rear end of the tablet or table resting my fore
fingers and thumbs on its edge looking vacantly with downcast eyes upon the table and
repenting like at my saying yes - when the spirit previous to my entering upon it had
235

spoken to me - I felt miserably queer - just like one undertaking a billet or post he knows
nothing of, so I remained for some considerable time, when I was aroused as it were from
my reverie by the voice of the spirit on my right hand (and his hand resting upon the table
with several printed paper within it) who said 'here are some papers for your guidance.'"
Associated with this sighting, and with the papers that contained formulas to make a
flying machine, the witness later experienced paranormal phenomena. Prior to the
observation of the "Ark" itself he had had a vision of faces in the sky. Some time later he
experienced poltergeist phenomena when the latch of a gate kept raising itself in full view
without visible cause. In April 1872 he observed three clouds of very peculiar shape,
which flew away quickly. He took this observation to be another divine instruction, the
meaning of which he could not decipher.
Source: The document containing this report has an interesting history. It is known as the

Memorandum Book of Fred Wm. Birmingham, the Engineer to the Council ofParramatta

and subtitled Aerial Machine. Researcher Bill Chalker has traced its post-1940s
whereabouts and spoken to some of the people involved. It seems it was originally written
in ink in a small black imitation-leather book, which came into the possession of a teacher
named Wallace Haywood, a resident of Parramatta. In the 1940s he passed the book to a
Mrs. N. de Launte, a qualified nurse who was looking after his wife, and she finally gave
it to ufologist Tasman V. Homan in the 1950s. Homan made a transcription of the book,
including the sketches contained in it, with the help of four other people. A copy of this
15-page typed version was discovered among the papers of an astrologer called June
Marsden. Mr. Fred Phillips, then honorary president of the Sydney-based UFO
Investigation Centre (UFOIC), showed this to Bill Chalker in 1975. The original (if it
exists?) has not been found, hence our reservations.

236

475.
8 June 1869, Fort Wayne, Indiana, USA: Circle of fire
About 2:30 A.M. an object "larger than the moon when full" was observed in the western
sky for half an hour.
"It was of a bright red color, and at intervals of a few minutes, darted forth on every
side bright rays like the straws of a broom, and from the ends of these were sent out sparks
like those of a Roman candle. Suddenly this would cease, and only the circle or ball of fire
remained, when again the rays would blaze out around the whole circumference of the
central ball."
Two witnesses, including the doorman of Pike's Opera House, watched the
phenomenon as it went down behind Mount Davidson, following the motion of the stars
and "still blazing and sputtering forth sparks and jets of fire."
Source: "Singular Celestial Phenomenon," Fort Wayne Daily Democrat (Fort Wayne,
Indiana), 9 June 1869.

476.
7 August 1869, Adamstown, Pennsylvania
A silvery object lands
At noon a luminous object was seen to descend from the sky to a dry, swampless area 200
yards north of the village, which is situated in Lancaster County. "It was square and
became a column about 3 or 4 feet in height and about 2 feet in thickness." The object

reflected sunlight "like a column of burnished silver" but after 10 minutes it disappeared.
Several people gathered at the spot where it had rested but there were no landing traces.
Source: Reading Eagle (Pennsylvania), 14 August 1869.

7 August 1869, Ottumwa, Iowa
Astronomer's sighting

477.

About 25 minutes before the totality of the solar eclipse, Professor Zentmayer observed
some bright objects crossing from one cusp to the other of the solar crescent.
Each object took two seconds to make the crossing. The points were well-defined and
must have been miles away from the telescope, given their sharpness.
Other sources indicate that similar objects were seen at the same time by Professor
Swift in Mattoon, Illinois and in Shelbyville, Kentucky by Alvan Clark Jr., George W.
Dean and professor Winlock, showing the objects were not local insects or seeds picked
up by the wind.
237

Source: Henry Morton, "Solar eclipse—August 7, 1869," Journal of the Franklin
Institute, S. 3, 58 (whole series, vol. 88): 200-16, at 213-4; Henry Morton, "Apparence
d'une pluie meteorique," Cosmos: Les Mondes 21: 241-3; "Meteors observed during a
total eclipse of the Sun," Popular Astronomy 2 (March 1895): 332-3.

Spring 1870, Alen, Norway
Flying object with occupant

478.

The grandmother of Lars Lillevold saw a flying object in the sky. "Somebody" aboard the
object beckoned to her.
Source: J. S. Krogh, The Hessdalen Report (CENAP Rept, 1985), 11.

479.
22 March 1870, Atlantic Ocean: Circle with five arms
On a very clear day, with the wind blowing from the north-northeast, Captain Frederick
William Banner and his crew of the American bark "Lady of the Lake" observed an object
at 6:30 P.M. in the south-southeast. The ship was located about halfway between Senegal
and Natal, Brazil, at latitude 5.47 N and longitude 27.52 W.
The object was described as "a circular cloud" light gray in color with a semicircle
near the center and four arm-like appendages reaching from the center to the edge of the
circle. Banner noted that "from the center to about 6 degrees beyond the circle was a fifth
ray, broader and more distinct than the others, with a curved end."
The object moved to the northeast, much lower than the cloud cover. It was last seen
at 7:20 P.M. about 30 degrees above the horizon.

Source: Quarterly Journal of the Meteorological Society, vol.1, new series, No. 6 (April
1873): 157.

15 August 1870, Dunbar, Scotland
Hovering ball of light

480.

About 8:45 P.M. a bright sparkling ball of light tinged with blue appeared about 45
degrees above the northern horizon.
"From the head or ball there issued a tail of the same bright colour...pointing in a
north-easterly direction. A remarkable circumstance was that it appeared quite motionless
and stationary. By-and-by, however, a second tail seemed to branch off from about the
middle of the first one, at an angle of 45 degrees, thus giving the tail of the figure a cleft or
forked appearance.
"This second tail seemed to come and go, being occasionally detached for a few
seconds, sometimes being lost to sight altogether...The phenomenon lasted with little
variation for fully 20 minutes, and then proceeded very slowly in a south-westerly
direction.
"No noise or explosion of any kind was heard during its passage. It attracted a great
deal of attention, and was witnessed with a great deal of excitement by the inhabitants of
the villages to the west."
238

Source: The Scotsman (Edinburgh), 17 Aug. 1870, 2. Two days later the same paper added
that the object had been seen by people on the Greenock Esplanade.

481.
26 September 1870, Berlin, Germany: Slow transit
"As I was last night examining the constellation Lyra through my 4 /2-inch achromatic,
with a power of 46,1 observed a luminous object, with a distinct comet-like tail, pass
slowly through the field of my glass, apparently starting from Vega and falling in the
direction of Epsilon Lyrae. The hour by my watch was 12:15, Berlin time. The time
occupied by this object in its transit across the disc of the glass was about 30 seconds, but
before it had reached its edge it disappeared suddenly from view. I at first thought it was a
falling star, but on reflection it appeared to me that a falling star would never have
remained so long visible in the telescopic field."
1

Source: Mr. Barbazon's letter to the editor of London Times, 30 Sept. 1870, 9.

2 August 1871, Marseille, France
Magnificent red object

482.

Camille Flammarion reports an observation made by Mr. Coggia, also the discoverer of a
comet. At 10:43 P.M. he observed a long-duration "bolide" that could not have been a
classical meteor, given its slow rate of progression in the sky. He described it as "a
magnificent red object." It moved eastward, slowly, clocked for no less than nine minutes.
It stopped, moved north, and was stationary again at 10:59. It turned eastward again and
was lost to sight at 11:03 P.M.

Source: Coggia. "Observation d'un bolide, faite a Observatoire de Marseille le ler aout,"
Comptes Rendus 73 (1871): 397-8.

483.
31 August 1872, Rome, Italy: Slow sky object
French astronomer and author Camille Flammarion notes another observation of a slowmoving object that could not have been a meteor, given its trajectory.
Source: Flammarion, Bradytes, op. cit., 135.

484.
2 June 1873, Paris, France: Three round objects
Astronomers from Paris observatory are reported to have observed three round bodies
evolving slowly at an altitude estimated at 80 km, leaving no trail.
Source: Le Journal du Ciel, unknown date and issue number.
485.

239

Ca. 30 August 1873, Brussels and Ste-Gudule, Belgium
Starlike mystery
At 8 P.M. an object was seen rising above the horizon in a clear sky. It was starlike,
mounted higher and higher for two minutes, and then disappeared suddenly.
Source: "Le meteore de Bruxelles," Nature 2 (Paris, Sept. 13 1873): 239.
486.
30 November 1873, Poissy, France: Slow transit
Several observers tracked a maneuvering object, red like Mars in color. It was in the sky
for 10 minutes. They first saw it in the North above the Big Dipper, then it approached the
star 'gamma' without touching it, moved away on several curves and disappeared in the
west. Camille Flammarion and Mr. Vinot, editor of Journal du Ciel, later made inquiries
that confirmed the sighting.
Source: Flammarion, Bradytes, op. cit., 159.
487.
24 April 1874, Prague, Czechoslovakia
Dazzling white object in front of the moon

Professor Schafarik observed "an object of so peculiar a character that I do not know what
to make of it."
He was observing the three-quarter moon at about 3:30 in the afternoon in bright
sunshine, using a 4-inch achromatic telescope by Dancer with power 66, field 34 minutes
of arc, when: "I was surprised by the apparition, on the disc of the moon, of a dazzling
white star, which travelled slowly from E.S.E. to W.N.W and after leaving the bright disc,
shone on the deep blue sky like Sirius or Vega in daylight and fine air. The star was quite
sharp and without a perceptible diameter."
Source: "Telescopic Meteors" in The Astronomical Register 273, (September 1885):
205-211. Professor Schafarik discusses the frequency and appearance of telescopic
meteors, which he places into four classes, for which he hypothesizes various
explanations, ranging from faint shooting stars at the limit of the atmosphere to such
mundane objects as birds, bats, the pappus of various seeds and "convolutions of
gossamer." He was genuinely puzzled, however, by the above observation.

488.
Ca. 17 February 1875, Pwllhi, Caernarvonshire, Wales
Eight lights on erratic trajectories
A reader of the Field newspaper reports that eight lights were seen at once, at an estimate
distance of 8 miles, moving in "horizontal, perpendicular and zigzag directions.
Sometimes they were a light blue colour, then like the bright light of a carriage lamp, then
almost like an electric light, and going out altogether, in a few minutes [they] would
appear dimly again, and come up as before."

Source: Notes and Queries, 17 April 1875. London Times of 5 October 1877 gives the
name of the witness as Mr. Picton Jones.

489.
About 12 January 1876, Sheridan, Pennsylvania
Gliding light and human figure
A man who was riding home on horseback at night had trouble controlling his terrified
horse when they were faced with a bright light on the bank of a creek. Very bright at first,
the light decreased in intensity, appearing to recede in the process. Urging the animal to
move forward, the witness saw the light again in a field, borne by what appeared to be a
human figure clothed in white that glided along the ground. When it came within 100
yards the horse dashed forward, almost unseating the witness.

Source: Reading Eagle (Pennsylvania), quoted in the St. Louis Democrat (Missouri), 17

January 1876.

490.
4 April 1876, Peckleloh, Germany: Planetary mystery

Mr. Weber, of Berlin, observed what he believed to be an intra-mercurial planetoid. The
time of the observation was 4:25 A.M. Berlin Mean Time. Astronomer Wolf reported this
sighting to Le Verrier in August 1876.
Source: "Les Planetes entre le Soleil et Mercure" Annee Scientifique et Industrielle 20
(1876): 6-11, at 7.
491.
17 March 1877, Gunnersbury, England
Long-lasting red celestial unknown
A large red "star" was witnessed in the sky about 8:55 P.M. in the constellation of
Serpens. It seemed to be brighter than Arcturus. After no less than 10 minutes it began to
"increase and diminish in magnitude two or three times," giving the impression that it was
flashing, after which it disappeared.
Source: Nature 15 (March 1877): 451.
492.

23 March 1877, Vence, France
Luminous balls emerge from a cloud-like formation

A number of lights appeared in the sky, described as balls of fire of dazzling brightness.
They emerged from a cloud about a degree in diameter and moved relatively slowly. They
were visible more than an hour, moving northward.
Source: "Eclairs en boule observes a Vence, en Provence" in Annee Scientifique et

Industrielle 21 (1877): 45-6.

493.
7 September 1877, Bloomington, Indiana, USA
Five luminous objects in the sky, stationary
Mr. John Graham "had his attention arrested by a sudden light in the heavens, and upon
looking up he saw a stationary meteor between Aquila and Anser et Vulpecula, about right
ascension 295°, declination 15°N. It increased in brightness for a second or more, and
disappeared within less than half a degree east of the point in which it was first seen.
Immediately after the extinction of the first, three others, separated by intervals of three or
four seconds, appeared and vanished in the same place; with the exception that one
disappeared about as much west of the radiant as the first did to the east of it. Mr.
Graham's curiosity was excited and he continued to watch till, after an interval of a few
minutes, a fifth meteor, corresponding in appearance to the preceding, was seen in the
same place. The meteors resembled stars of the first magnitude."
A possible interpretation of this observation would be an exceedingly unlikely train of
identical meteorites falling directly in the direction of the observer over a period of several
minutes.

Source: Scientific American, 29 Sept. 1877, New Series, 37: 193.

494.

22 January 1878, Dallas, Texas, USA
Dark object: the very first "flying saucer?"
Mr. John Martin, a farmer who lived some six miles north of town, was out hunting in the
morning when his attention was directed to a dark object in the northern sky.
"The peculiar shape, and the velocity with which the object seemed to approach,
riveted his attention, and he strained his eyes to discover its character. When first noticed
it appeared to be about the size of an orange, which continued to grow in size."
Going through space at a wonderful speed, it came directly overhead and Mr. Martin
compared it to "a large saucer."
First mentioned in the UFO literature by Major Donald Keyhoe, this use of the word
"saucer" by John Martin has triggered many debates among researchers. John Martin's
use of the term seems to relate to the size of the object rather than its shape, just as
Kenneth Arnold, in 1947, would use it to describe the motion of the crescent-shaped
objects he witnessed. It is interesting, nonetheless, that "saucer" should be the word that
came to the mind of these men when they tried to describe what they saw. The possibility
that Martin observed a balloon must also be considered. The site is more likely to be
Dallas than Denison.

242

Source: Denison Daily News for 25 January 1878, 1.

495.
c. 1st February 1878, Osceola Township, Iowa, USA
Strange light in the road
A newspaper reported that a strange phenomenon had occurred in Osceola Township,
Iowa, one evening the evening the week before. A young man "well known in the
community" was crossing the fields when his attention was attracted by a light moving
along the road some way ahead. It was "much larger than a lantern," and it came nearer:
"When the light reached a point in the road nearly opposite him it stopped and came
directly toward him with great velocity, until it was within a few feet of him when it
stopped. The observer describes it as about the size of a half bushel and of intense
brightness. It then rose in the air a distance of several rods and then began to descend
where the gentleman stood. He says that he is not usually easily frightened, but he could
not account for the strange sight and he retraced his steps to the house he had just left."
The light followed him up to his neighbor's house, where the witness told of what he
had seen. Two men there offered to accompany him home. They started out but the light
had apparently disappeared. Then, suddenly, "it again made its appearance and was
distinctly seen by all three." This time it did not approach as closely as before, but would
disappear and reappear in an entirely different direction and at a distance from where it
was last seen.
The article finishes with the statement that the light was also seen by others in the
neighborhood, none of whom could explain the strange occurrence.

Source: "Strange Phenomenon," Ackley Enterprise, Iowa, February 8, 1878. The report
was originally published in the Hampton Chronicle but as there are no precise details, our
date of February 1 is only an estimation.

496.
29 July 1878, Rawlins, Wyoming, USA
Unidentified planetoid observed by two astronomers
Professor Watson has observed a shining object at a considerable distance from the sun
during the total eclipse. A confirmatory observation was made by Professor Swift of
Denver, Colorado. Astronomer Lockyer commented: "There is little doubt that an IntraMercurial planet has been discovered by Professor Watson."

243

Source: Lewis Swift, "Discovery of Vulcan," Nature 18 (19 September 1878): 539. Also
The Observatory 2 (1878): 161-2 and J. Norman Lockyer: "The Eclipse" Nature 18 (29
August 1878): 457-62, at 461.

497.
30 July 1878, Edwardsville, Kansas, USA
Unknown light rushes down the train tracks
Mr. Timmons, "one of the most substantial farmers and reliable men in Wyancotte
county," reports that "the section men on the K. P. road, on my farm, seeing the storm
coming up very fast, got their hand-car on the track and started full speed for

Edwardsville. They had run but a little ways when the entire crowd, at the same time, saw
coming around the curve of Edwardsville what they supposed to be a locomotive at full
speed.
"They jumped down and took their car off the track as fast as possible when they saw
it was not a locomotive. Whatever it was came down the track giving off a volume of
dense smoke with occasional flashes resembling a head light in the centre of smoke. It
came three-fourths of a mile from where they first saw it, then turned off the track at a pile
of cordwood, went round it once, then went off in a southwesterly direction, through a
thick wood. The section men came running to my house evidently much frightened and
bewildered by what they saw."
Note: globular lightning may have produced this effect, as the ball of plasma could
have been guided by the train tracks until it grounded itself. The duration of the
phenomenon, however, makes it most unusual.
Source: Atchison Globe (Kansas), 7 August 1878.

498.
11 August 1878, McKeesport, Pennsylvania, USA
Planetoid passing in front of Jupiter
Two amateur astronomers, Messrs. Gemill and Wampler, observed an unusual celestial
object using a 5-inch telescope. At 10:05 P.M. they noticed a dark round spot on the
eastern margin of the disc of Jupiter. It moved west, just above the northern belt, parallel
with the planet's equator, and passed off the face at 1:24 A.M. on 12 August, having
crossed the disk in 3 hours and 19 minutes.

The object appeared as a perfect sphere, much larger than any of Jupiter's satellites. It
was well-defined and sharp, most intensely black. The observers commented "it was
neither a satellite nor the shadow of one, because all four satellites were in full view all the
time."
Note: Jupiter has other satellites that were unknown at the time, but they are much
smaller than the four satellites in question, and could not explain the effect observed.
244

Source: The Indiana Progress (Indiana, Pennsylvania), 22 August 1878.

499.
12 April 1879, Manhattanville, New York, USA
Unexplained astronomical phenomenon
"Upon the evening, Mr. Henry Harrison was searching for Brorsen's comet, when he saw
an object that was moving so rapidly that it could not have been a comet. He called a
friend to look, and his observation was confirmed. At 2 A.M. this object was still visible
(...) Mr. Harrison disclaims sensationalism, which he seems to find unworthy, and gives
technical details: he says the object was seen by Mr. J. Spencer Devoe, of
Manhattanville."
Source: "A Curious astronomical phenomenon" in Scientific American n. s., 40: 294; New
York Tribune, 17 April 1879, 2, c.3; also Henry Harrison's entry in Scientific American
Supplement 7(21 June 1879): 2884-5.

500.

10 October 1879, Dubuque, Iowa, USA
Large unexplained airship overhead

"People who were up at a very early hour this morning were astonished at seeing what
appeared to be a large balloon going over the city. It was seen by quite a number of
persons in different parts of the city, and was visible for an hour."
The object disappeared on the horizon, moving in a southwesterly direction. It is
noteworthy that an employee of the Times named Thomas Lloyd saw this balloon as it was
very high in the southeast and traveled south slowly, rising and falling in its course.
A real balloon (the "Pathfinder") piloted by professor John Wise had taken off from
the town of Louisiana, Missouri in this period, but it had fallen into lake Michigan some
ten days before, and could not have been the cause of the sighting.
It is noteworthy that the last eight sightings in the Chronology come from the United
States, and that the last one is a report of an unknown "airship" flying slowly over a city.
But that, as journalists of the nineteenth century liked to say, "is another story."
Source: The Inner Ocean (Chicago, Illinois), 11 October 1879.

Epilogue to Part I-F

245

Three aspects stand out when we review 19 century reports of unusual aerial
phenomena:
- Meteors and meteorites were reported with greater enthusiasm and in more abundance
than in previous times. The press, exploiting people's interests and concerns for the sake
of sales, began a love story with these still-mysterious astronomical phenomena, and it
lasted till the end of the century. Given the interest in meteorites in the name of scientific
progress, the public was encouraged to report the latest observations at their local
newspaper offices.
- Claims of extraterrestrial encounters were first made in this century. Such claims were
not published until the 1850s on, but tall tales involving the alleged inhabitants of the
moon, allegedly spied through telescopes, had become popular decades earlier. It was not
long before stories of aliens on the moon would turn into stories of aliens on visits to
Earth. Indeed, by the late 19 century the press would be full of articles speculating on
what extraterrestrials drank and ate, on the average height of Venusians and on whether
airships had already made the journey across interstellar space to meet us. As early as
1847 the Mormons, followed by the Jehovah's Witnesses, began to discuss interplanetary
travel and speculated on which physical planet God inhabited. We have generally avoided
including examples here for want of truly convincing cases.
- Reports of UFO crashes were first claimed in the nineteenth century. Though examples
can be found in the literary efforts of earlier generations, allegedly factual reports had
th

th

never been published before. That most of these cases were probably hoaxes is not in
doubt, hence our avoidance of them, but they do allow us a glimpse of the world's new
mentality.
We stopped our Chronology before 1880 because the world was about to change
radically and irreversibly, with increasingly common access to novel forms of energy and
transportation: The Suez Canal was opened; John D. Rockefeller founded Standard Oil;
Most significantly, the first mobile gas engine was demonstrated by Siegfried Marcus, and
other engineers rushed to make plans for new vehicles based on the internal combustion
engine, which had been demonstrated as early as 1860 by Lenoir.
With the introduction of automobiles, the telegraph and an oil-based economy, the
basic structure of the modern world was established. In science, the first measurements of
the speed of light were accomplished, and the kinetic theory of gases published. In
technology, high tension induction coils, cast-iron frame buildings, Bunsen gas burners,
and Singer's sewing machines were developed.
Most importantly for our purpose, the social context was revolutionized by changing
standards in journalism, the increasing demand for escapism and instant news and the
renewed fascination for the exotic and the unknown.
In 1876 Italian priest Pietro Secchi announced that he had discovered "canals" on
Mars. When astronomer Antonio Schiaparelli confirmed this observation in 1877, and
Asaph Hall discovered the two satellites of Mars the same year at the Naval Observatory,
it led to much renewed speculation about life on other planets, which in turn tended to
color reports of unexplained aerial objects and inspired today's fascination with the
extraterrestrial theory, to the exclusion of any other hypothesis about these phenomena.
It is not for lack of data that we decided to stop this chronology when we did. The end
of the nineteenth century would see an extraordinary burst of sightings, popularized by the
new media and amplified by the growth of urban centers, the greater ease of travel and the
vast extension of the railroads and the telegraph. A catalogue of unexplained aerial
phenomena beyond our chronology would deal with history's first major "wave" of
7

reports about 1885 and with an even bigger one from the fall of 1896 to 1897. The records
of that era, now known as "the Airship Wave," if they are ever analyzed and published,
will dwarf the present book.

PART II

248

Myths, Legends, and Chariots of the Gods
In our effort to understand how certain recurring themes linked to unexplained aerial
phenomena have evolved and spread throughout human history, we have tested many
claims for the sake of accuracy. Naturally, given the hoary age of these accounts, it was
not possible for us to measure the truth or falsity of every story compiled. However, in the
process of analysis, we have uncovered many spurious items that cloud the literature of
the field. Some of them deserve special documentation.
Descriptions of unexplained objects or phenomena in the sky are found in the records
of the earliest civilizations that used some form of writing. Several serious authors, such
as Alexander Kazantsev and professor Agrest in Russia or Aime Michel in France, have
suggested that some prehistoric rock carvings and primitive statues were indicative of
contact with non-human visitors from the sky.
Less cautious or less scholarly writers such as Erich von Daniken and Zecharia
Sitchin have expanded this notion into the popular theme of Ancient Astronauts, where it
is assumed that the Earth was either visited or colonized by beings from another planet.
Some forms of the Ancient Astronaut theory quote the Bible and other ancient texts in

support of the notion that these beings intermarried with primitive earthlings or modified
them genetically to produce modern humans.
Indeed, the literature of earlier centuries is rich in legends involving beings flying in
the heavens, sometimes alongside humans as witnesses or as participants in their warfare
or their lovemaking. Although such accounts are too vague in date and circumstances to
be included in our chronology, they cannot be ignored in any study of the history of the
field. Having said this, the reliability of these accounts must be critically challenged,
either because they were the product of poetic imagination, because they were fabrications
used in blatant support of political or religious movements of the time, or because they
were invented by opportunistic authors and popularized by overly credulous readers.
Other accounts in the literature were genuine historical events that were
misinterpreted in good faith by observers at the time, and propped up later as "evidence"
for various theories,
some of which still
flourish
in contemporary
have classified the stories we have rejected from the main chronology, under four major
categories.

Deceptive story, hoax, fictional account or tall tale.
These accounts may be deliberately couched as true happenings, or they may have been
lifted from their fictional context by later retelling as true facts. History is full of examples
where a simple rumor gave rise to major movements while truthful accounts were only
reconstructed much later.

works.

Religious vision.
The real (or imagined) arrival of beings and artifacts from outside Earth has had enormous
impact on human societies, and the evidence can be considered from many points of view.
Theology has been shaped by a belief in sky-dwelling divinities. If mysterious craft are
seen in the sky and stones fall from the clouds, what can Man's position in the scheme of
things be?
Religious visions have their own characteristics, and we do not feel qualified to judge
their relevance to the overall problem. While they may represent true happenings for large
groups of believers, these accounts are not amenable to scientific study in the same sense
as the observation of an objective phenomenon.
It has not escaped our notice that a genuine paranormal phenomenon may come to us
dressed up as a religious vision, either because the witnesses interpreted it in such terms,
or because the standards of the society around them demanded such an interpretation.
Therefore we do not exclude reports purely on such a basis.

Natural astronomical phenomenon.
Throughout history, mankind has anxiously observed the heavens for signs of future
events. The sky has answered with a bewildering series of displays, such as comets and
meteors, which we recognize today as natural phenomena. Ancient accounts of such
"wonders in the sky" provide precious information for today's astronomers, in the form of
accurate data on the periodicity of comets, and the frequency of meteor showers, to give
only two obvious examples. Auroral displays (aurora borealis) are frequently the occasion
for historical amazement, and rightly so: The natural mechanism for such phenomena was
not fully understood by physicists until the present (21st ) century.

Optical illusion or atmospheric effect.
These deserve a category apart. Here we deal with sincere witnesses faced with
spectacular sky displays such as luminous crosses, multiple suns, multiples moons, or
fantastic mirages. The mechanism behind such displays has only become understood in
recent centuries, and new discoveries are still being made today about the properties of the
atmosphere, lightning, tornadoes (often seen by terrified witnesses as sky serpents or
dragons), the propagation of light through the air, and yes, even swamp gas!
It would be most interesting to compile an exhaustive list of events reported in the
ancient literature under the general topic of sky phenomena. Some authors such as
William Corliss have published catalogues of scientific anomalies that give fascinating
compilations for comets, meteors, globular lightning, or aurorae borealis. Such work was
not within our scope, but we needed to tell the reader why certain well-known incidents
had been excluded from our main chronology.
The following list, selected among hundreds of items, makes interesting and
sometimes comical reading. It illustrates the vagaries of the human mind, indeed even the
scientific mind, as it tries to come to grips with phenomena beyond its understanding.

400 million years ago, Kentucky, USA
Crashed saucer, strange alien bodies

One of the most common recurring themes in the literature of this field is that of a flying
machine that comes down from the sky and crashes, along with its extraterrestrial
occupants. Far from being unique to Roswell, crashes of alien artifacts constitute a
standard story, complete with descriptions of small cadavers and mysterious writing on
the recovered craft. The present case, however, which is little known even within the
paranormal community, must set some sort of record in terms of the extremely ancient
date of the alleged incident.
In January 1969, the American periodical Beyond Magazine published a curious
article about an alleged extraterrestrial fossil found in Kentucky. "Reader Melvin R. Gray
of 417 South 5 St., Louisville, Kentucky, 40202," wrote columnist Brad Steiger, "has
discovered a stone which has what he considers very suspicious indentations." Mr. Gray's
examination of the stone led him to conclude that it contained fossilized remains of tiny
humanoid creatures and "what may at one time have been a tiny flying saucer no larger
than our present day washbasins or dishpans."
No photographs illustrated the article but Gray described the stones as looking like "a
small chunk of meteor." In order to get a better idea of what the "beings" looked like he
made plaster, fiberglass, and aluminum castings from the rock. He reported:
th

251

"The fossilized creatures themselves are humanoid in appearance, looking
very much like ourselves, and approximately three inches tall. (...) The stone
looks rather cindery as if it may have hurtled through a long trail of space,
melting as it went and finally splashing into some river or lake before it was
entirely consumed, leaving...a fossil-like imprint for a permanent record to tell
the world...that we had visitors to our earth...who had met with some terrible
calamity."

Steiger himself was not entirely convinced. While acknowledging that, with the aid of
a magnifying glass, he could make out the outline of "a tiny human pilot sitting in a
bucket-type seat" on the casts that Gray sent him, he wondered whether it was merely a
trick of nature? There was no reason to think Gray had made the "fossil" himself.
A second article was published about Melvin Gray's fossil in Ray Palmer's magazine
Flying Saucers. In "A Fossilized Alien Spaceship and its Occupants," Executive Director
of the Kentucky-based National UFO Research and Investigation Committee, Buffard
Ratliff, wrote that, after reading about Gray in Beyond, he contacted Mr. Gray and
obtained the fossil.
Gray told Ratliff that he and his wife had come across the stone while cutting the
grass in their back yard. He then examined the artifact carefully "for a period of
approximately seven months and made several discoveries that led him to believe it might
possibly be from outer space."
Ratliff and Gray were able to find "seven very small creatures... in or on the fossilized
stone." Three of the creatures were ape-like in appearance. The other four were humanoid.
All were approximately three inches in height, vertebrates, and very strong for their size.
Ratliff and Gray concluded that the three tiny ape-like creatures "could very well be
humanoids in special space suits," and that these beings were in a separate section of the
craft they labeled "B." However they were quick to point out that one of the humanoids
was also in that section, as opposed to section "A" of the spacecraft. As the two sections
seemed to be divided, "apparently where the spaceship is fitted together," this "indicates
intelligent construction and design by intelligent beings."
252

After some more interpretation the researchers arrived at a breathtaking theory: the craft
had come from outer space and crashed into a large body of water during the last ice age.
The water extinguished the fire, but the craft sank to the bottom and became encased in

sand and clay, becoming a fossil. There it lay dormant for some 400,000,000 years till
Melvin Gray almost trod on it as he was mowing the lawn in his back yard in Louisville,
Kentucky.
It is evident from the information presented in Beyond and Flying Saucers that neither
Gray nor Ratliff were able to present any basis for their incredible theory other than their
own imaginative interpretation of the rough exterior of the stone. What reference material
the investigators used, and exactly what tests were carried out was not explained.

rr

12,000 years ago
Granite disks tell a story about Alien vehicles
This is yet another case of crashed spacecraft leaving mysterious material covered with
alien writing, a recurrent theme in contemporary ufology. In July 1962 a German
magazine called Das Vegetarische Universum [The Vegetarian Universe] published an
article about a strange finding made in the mountains between China and Tibet. It is a tale
that regularly turns up in UFO contact lists, in books, magazines and on the Internet. It
therefore deserves our attention. The author, Reinhardt Wegemann, reports that:
"In the borderland between Tibet and China lies the cave area of the high
mountains of Baian-Kara-Ula. Here the strange discovery of hieroglyphic writing
tablets was made 25 years ago. Several thousand years ago, record-shaped plates
were sawed out of the hardest granite rock, with untraceable and completely
unknown appliances."

Wegeman went on to state that 716 rock plates had been recovered, each resembling
records, with a hole in the centre and a groove spiralling to the outer edge. He stated that it
took two decades for archaeologists and linguists to decipher the script, the content of
which so stunned the Academy of Prehistory in Beijing that they forbade its publication?
However, one of the researchers, Professor Tsum Um-nui, is said to have discussed this
matter with a small group of colleagues and decided to release a report without official
consent. The archaeologists reportedly came to the conclusion that "The grooved writing
tells of vehicles from the air, which must have arrived 12,000 years ago. In one place it
says literally that the Dropa came down from the clouds with their air gliders. Ten times
the men, women and children of the Kham hid in the caves until dawn. Afterwards they
understood the signs and saw that the Dropa came with peaceful intentions..."
The story adds that the aerial fleet was destroyed on landing and that graves of small
humans of the Dropa and Kham race with thin bodies and unusually large heads can be
found in the caves, along with star maps carved on the rock walls. Furthermore,
53

"Rock particles were scraped off one of the writing plates and were sent for
analysis to Moscow. A sensational discovery was made: The grooved plates are
strongly cobalt and metallic. When a whole plate was tested with an oscillograph,
a surprising rhythm of oscillation showed up, as though, once 'loaded,' the plates
with the grooved writing would have somehow served as electrical conductors."
The critical analysis of this amazing tale yields certain surprises. Oddly enough, very few
who support the reality of it know anything about its origins. Whole books and articles
have been written on or around this story with absolutely no reference to its author or first
publication. This absence of detail is what gives the impression that its origins are
"shrouded in mystery," and therefore leaves its reality status open to all sorts of theories.
Unfortunately, after several years inquiring through colleagues and journalist friends, and

conducting thorough searches of newspaper archives, no German writer by the name of
Reinhardt Wegemann could be found.

Fig. 38: The Dropa hoax
In July 1964 the same article was published again, as if new, in the German UFO
magazine UFO-Nachrichten. Here, "Wegemann" made no mention of the fact that his
report was now 'old news,' and added no new revelations about the discs.
From this moment on, the "Dropa" would become famous all over the world. The
French/Belgian UFO organization BUFOI referred to them in March 1965, and in 1966
Wegemann's article was translated into Russian and published by the Soviet journal
Neman. A year later, Dr. Vyatcheslav Zaitzev wrote about the discs of Baian Kara Ula for
the first edition of the Soviet magazine Sputnik. Owing to the enormous distribution of
this publication, many have erroneously cited Zaitzev as the original source of the story.
News of the Dropa was published for the first time in the United States on 26 February
1967. A journalist of the Los Angeles Herald-Examiner, using the article from Sputnik,
compared the finding of the cave drawings to a star map allegedly seen by UFO abductee,
Betty Hill. By this time Reinhardt Wegemann had been forgotten and the tale's origins
254

completely obscured. Over the next three decades details would be lost, others invented,
and the spelling of the name of the Dropa tribe would become increasingly exotic: Dzopa,
Dhzopa, Dzohpa, Dhropa, and so on.
The first skeptical enquiries began in 1973, when the director of the British magazine
Flying Saucer Review, Gordon Creighton, a serious scholar of the field, reported he could
find no record of any archaeological expedition to Baian Kara Ula in 1938. Creighton also
pointed out that the name of the mountains was more usually written "Bayan Khara Uula,"
Mongol words meaning "the good black mountains" ("Bayan Har Shan" in Chinese), and
that there were no records of any archaeologist named Chi Pu Tei. Likewise, all attempts
to trace Tsum Um Nui or his report have failed.
In 1979 a further twist came in a book called Sungods in Exile, edited by one David
Agamon, who declared it to be the posthumous work of a British scientist called Karyl
Robin-Evans. The work describes an expedition to Baian Kara Ula led by Robin-Evans in
1947 with the aim to gather information about a disc that had been purchased in India or
Nepal by a colleague of his in Oxford, a Polish scholar named Sergei Lolladoff.
According to Agamon, the expedition met with a tribe of dwarves in a remote valley in the
region and these beings, the Dropa, told him that their ancestors had come from a planet in
the Sirius system and had been trapped on the earth in the year 1014 AD due to a
mechanical problem with their spacecraft.
Years later, Agamon (using his real name, Gamon) confessed in letters to the editor ^
Fortean Times that Sungods in Exile was a hoax and none of the characters in it were real.
Even so, photographs taken by Gamon of a fake "Dropa disc" are still believed by many
to be authentic, giving rise to rumors and speculation. Meanwhile, the real Dzopa people
of Tibet live in blissful ignorance of the whole affair.
2

Circa 4780 BC: The fiery Vimanas of King Citraketu

The earliest dated story we are able to find about flying devices of non-human origin
comes from the ancient literature of India. For instance the Bhagavata Parana, also
known as Srimad Bhagavatam, a text that is part of Hindu literature, states that while
Indian King Citraketu was traveling in outer space on a "brilliantly effulgent ship given to
him by Lord Vishnu," he saw Lord Shiva: "The arrows released by Lord Shiva appeared
like fiery beams emanating from the sun globe and covered the three residential ships,
which could then no longer be seen." {Srimad Bhagavatam, Sixth Canto, Part 3). If the
reference to this particular King is trustworthy, the event would have taken place about
4,780 BC.
The Vedic literature, including India's national epic, the Mahabharata, a poem of
vast length and complexity, contains many descriptions of flying machines generally
called Vimanas. Another text, the Ramayana, which can be loosely translated as 'the
travels of Rama,' tells of two-storied celestial chariots with many windows that roar off
into the sky until they appear like comets. Sanskrit books describe at length these chariots,
"powered by winged lighting.. .it was a ship that soared into the air, flying to both the
solar and stellar regions."
There are no physical remains of ancient Indian aircraft technology but references to
ancient flying machines are commonplace in the Indian texts. Several popular epics
describe their use in warfare. Depending on one's point of view, either it contains some of
the earliest known science fiction (a sort of Indian Star Wars) or it records conflict
between beings with weapons as powerful and advanced as anything used today.

Fig. 39: Flying Vimana at Ellora caves, India
It is a curious fact that the yantras (Sanskrit for "machines") described in later Indian
texts were less powerful than those mentioned in greater and older works. Does this imply
a gradual departure from fantasy towards realism? Some have proposed the change
reflects a loss of knowledge. Richard L. Thompson writes: "Some ascribe this to the
fantastic imagination of ancient writers or their modern redactors. But it could also be
explained by a progressive loss of knowledge as ancient Indian civilization became
weakened by corruption and was repeatedly overrun by foreign invaders. It has been
argued that guns, cannons, and other firearms were known in ancient India and that the
knowledge gradually declined and passed away toward the beginning of the Christian
era." (Alien Identities, San Diego: Govardhan Hill, 1993, 258.)
256

Circa 2637 BC, China
Relativity and the Emperor's dragon
According to an article circulating on the Internet, the legendary First Emperor Huang-Ti
(the "Yellow Emperor", who instituted the calendar that survives in China to this day for
festival dates, and is said to be the ancestor of all Han Chinese) had a "dragon" named
Changhuan, that could move through space at enormous velocities. One ancient writing
mentioned that it "originated in the land where suns are born," and was over 3,000 years
old. Its enormous speed had an effect on the movement of time, affecting the ageing
process, a surprising early reference to the relativity of time, 4,400 years before Albert
Einstein.
Huang-Ti is said to have manufactured 12 gigantic mirrors of unknown nature and
used them "following the Moon," as well as miraculous tripods about 4 meters high. The
legends of ancient China said that the "tripods" depicted "dragons, flying in the clouds."
We have not been able to verify these statements or to consult the sources listed,
which appear to come from the late scientist and orientalist Igor Lissevich (magazine
"Asia and Africa Today", 1974, No. 11, in Russian). Lissevich also presented his
scientific findings at the 1975 Zelenchuk SETI Symposium ("Problem of SETI", Moscow
1981, in Russian). Igor Lissevich knew Chinese and was a reliable source. The original
references are quoted as "Records of the foremost deeds of Huang-Ti the Great" and
"Glorification of the three tripods of Huang-Ti" written by Zao Ji. The Yellow Emperor
Huang-Ti is said by tradition to have reigned from 2698 BC to 2598 BC.

Circa 2357 BC
Japan's "divine man" and his luminous monster

257

Entries in various UFO lists mention that "According to Tau-se from an ancient
manuscript called Sey-to-ki, during the time of Emperor Ton-Yo, in the year of "MonSham" a divine man descended from the sky, using a "monster that was emitting
light" (spacecraft?). The people called this man "the master." He received the name Tankun (Sandalwood God) and his country was called Peson."
The source for this item is Space Visitors in Ancient Japan by Mikhail Rosenshpitz in
Unbelievable World No. 8, August 2004. When we tried to research this item it was found
to contain spurious information and we could not locate anything supporting it,
unfortunately a frequent situation with both online cases and UFO books.
In this case, our first goal was to obtain a copy of the original article by Rosenshpitz.
This proved more complicated than we expected because it turned out that Unbelievable
World did not exist. The correct Russian name of the magazine was Neveroyatnyi Mir, a
paranormalparanormal news journal distributed in the Ukraine. Steering away from
sensationalist press wherever possible, we decided this was not a source we could use.
Observant readers may have noticed that the year given is also spurious, because even
legendary Japanese rulers date back only as far as Emperor Jimmu, who supposedly
founded Japan in March 585 BC! No real or mythical Japanese emperor had a name
resembling Ton-Yo. After playing with different spellings we realized the account must be
from Chinese tradition, not Japanese. Indeed, Tause was just an unusual transcription of
Tao-se, or "Tao Teacher." The information may refer to the legendary Lord Yao or
Tangyao, who supposedly reigned between 2357 and 2258 BC However, as we could find
nothing resembling the story of the "divine man" and the light-emitting monster in the
Chinese literature available to us, we quickly lost faith in the account.

Circa 2208 BC
A Chinese Emperor flies away from danger
The emperor of China is said to have flown in an aerial machine and descended back to
earth, (reference: Hervey - Winkler catalog, published by FUFOR - the Fund for UFO
Research). It turns out that this is a story about Emperor Shun, who supposedly reigned
between 2258 and 2208 BC. However the actual incident has nothing to do with the
machine' account.
In the Shi Ji (Historical Records) Sima Qian relates that Shun's father Gu Sou wanted
to kill him. Finding him at the top of a granary tower, he set fire to it. Shun escaped by
assembling a pile of large conical straw hats together and leaping down! See The Shorter
Science and Civilization in China Vol. 4, by Colin A. Ronan: Cambridge University Press
1994, 290.

Circa 1900 BC
Egypt, the death star and a gold serpent
The first ancient reference to an unidentified object from the sky in relation to strange
beings is found in an authentic Egyptian papyrus generally considered to belong to the
twelfth dynasty, 1991 to 1802 BC. The text, known as The Tale of the Shipwreck, was
discovered by chance in 1880 by Golenischeff in the Ermitage Museum of Saint
Petersburg and is now on display at a Moscow Museum. It tells how the lone survivor of a
shipwreck was carried by the waves to a mysterious tropical island that nobody had seen

before. The ruler of the island was a giant, glowing, human-headed serpent, "his body
overlaid with gold, and his color as that of true lapis-lazuli." This being seemed pleased to
meet the unfortunate sailor and invited him to his home as a guest.
Egyptologist G. Maspero, very much an authority in his day, translated the extract in
Les Contes de I'Egypte Ancienne (4 Edition, Paris 1911):
th

We are seventy-five Serpents in number, my children and my brothers, not
mentioning the young girl who was brought to me by the magic art. Because
when a star fell, those who were in the fire with her came out and the young girl
appeared; and I was not amongst the beings of the flame, I was not amongst
them, else I would be dead, but I found her among the corpses, alone.
What 'star' is the serpent-being referring to? Unfortunately no details are given in the
papyrus. Was the 'star' a meteorite, as most scholars suggest? It seems possible but it
cannot be proved. There was no word to describe meteorites in the Egyptian hieroglyphic
system, so the word 'star' ("seba") could be used as a wild card for any kind of luminous
phenomenon travelling in the sky.
Analysis of the tale reveals that it already contains imagery that would become the
framework of 'encounter' stories for the next three and a half thousand years. The island,
which the text actually says will sink into the sea again like fabled Atlantis, would be
replaced by what is nowadays called a 'window area.' The reptile king would hardly
change at all over time, as humanoid serpents and "reptilian beings" are a staple element
in mythology and UFO lore all over the world. And wherever supernatural beings dwell in
folklore, mysterious lights, or crashing objects are never far away.
Similar stories come from ancient China: the dragon king had his palace on an island
in the ocean. This island was said to vanish and reappear regularly, confusing sailors and

giving rise to many strange beliefs. "Sometimes," writes Donald Mackenzie, "a red light
burns above the island at night. It is seen many miles distant, and its vivid rays may be
reflected in the heavens." A Japanese story describes the island as "a glowing red mass
resembling the rising sun."

Circa 1766 BC, China: Feathered guests from the sky
"The Xian were immortals capable of flight under their own divine power. They were said
to be feathered, and a term that has been used for Taoist priests is yu ke, meaning
'feathered guest'. The fei tian, which might be translated as 'flying immortals', also add to
the numbers of airborne beings in the Chinese mythological corpus."
"The Chinese tales of fei che, flying vehicles, exhibit the first understanding, perhaps,
that humans would fly only with some kind of technological apparatus."

Source: Dr. Benjamin B. Olshin, Mechanical Mythology: Private Descriptions of Flying
Machines as Found in Early Chinese, Korean, Indian, and Other Texts (from extensive
quotes available online).

Circa 1515 BC: Egypt: The infamous Tulli papyrus

Shiny objects "brighter than the Sun" flew south and left a foul odor, according to an
ancient Egyptian document found among the papers of Alberto Tulli, a director of the
Egyptian museum at the Vatican.
The text appeared in 1953, in Issue 41 of Doubt, journal of the Fortean Society, when
novelist and co-founder of the Society, Tiffany Thayer (1902-1959), published the
hieroglyphic translation of what would soon be known as the "Tulli Papyrus."
Accompanying the transcription was a letter from its translator, an amateur Egyptologist
of Russian-Italian descent, Boris de Rachewiltz. This letter explained that the papyrus ha®
been passed on to Tulli's brother Gustavo, a priest. Rachewiltz had been sent the
hieroglyphic transcription for translation.
Rachewiltz explained to Doubt that the papyrus had been longer, and indeed we must
assume the unpublished part referred to an incident during the reign of Thutmosis III
because the fragment we have provides no sign of this. Several versions of the translation
have been published, but the following is the first, as it appeared in Doubt.
"In the year 22, third month of winter, sixth hour of the day (...) The scribes of
the House of Life found it was a circle of fire that was coming in the sky.
(Though) it had no head, the breath of its mouth (had) a foul odour. Its body one
'rod' long and one 'rod' large. It had no voice. Their hearts become confused
through it: then they laid themselves on their bellies (...) They went to the King
(...?) to report it. His majesty ordered (...) has been examined (...) as to all
which is written in the papyrus-rolls of the House of Life. His Majesty was
meditating upon what happened. Now, after some days had passed over those
things, Lo! They were more numerous than anything. They were shining in the
sky more than the sun to the limits of the four supports of heaven. (...) Powerful
was the position of the fire circles. The army of the king looked on and His
Majesty was in the midst of it. It was after supper. Thereupon they (i.e. the fire

circles) went up higher directed to South. Fishes and volatiles fell down from the
sky. (It was) a marvel that never occurred since the foundation of this Land!
Caused His Majesty to be brought incense to pacify the hearth (...to write?) what
happened in the book of the House of Life (...to be remembered?) for Eternity."

Fig. 40: The Tulli papyrus hoax
If the Tulli papyrus is authentic, the objects it describes must indeed be classified as
UFOs. Their shape, luminosity and silent movement in the sky are familiar. The text
quickly became a classic in books of the genre, used first by George Adamski and
Desmond Leslie in their Flying Saucers Have Landed (1953) and later by popular writers
such as Harold Wilkins in Flying Saucers Uncensored (1956). We could devote many
pages to the evolution of this document during its first 50 years of life in ufology.

However, space allows us only to outline the reasons we have not included it in the maitf
body of this book.
First of all, the whereabouts of the Tulli Papyrus are completely unknown. Not even
Boris de Rachewiltz knew where the original was kept. Later correspondence with
Rachewiltz revealed he had only ever received the Egyptologist's personal notes, not the
papyrus itself, and that even Albert Tulli had only made his transcription during a visit to
the house of an antiquarian in Cairo in 1934. Reportedly, the papyrus had been too
expensive for him to purchase at the time.
Secondly, the hieroglyphics Rachewiltz received, and which Doubt published, were
not the characters on the original document. Tulli copied them down in hieratic - a kind of
ancient Egyptian shorthand - and another Egyptologist, Etienne Marie-Felix Drioton
(1889-1961), converted these into hieroglyphic symbols. We have no way of checking the
accuracy of that conversion.
Finally, the contents of the papyrus seem somewhat too convenient a find for the
editors of Doubt magazine. In one stroke the text combines flying saucers - a hot topic in
the early 1950s - with rains of fish and other animals, a staple of Fortean research since
the phenomenon was famously popularized by the Society's founder, Charles Fort. The
fact that Rachewiltz was a member of the Fortean Society and a friend of Tiffany Thayer,
also gives us cause for questioning the document's authenticity.
61

Circa 1447 BC, Nile Valley, Egypt
Moses and the blue object
Moses is seen brandishing a rod and triggering rains of blood, in an ancient illustration
that shows a complex flying object. This picture is taken from the Ashkenazi Haggaciah, in

a section showing the Plagues of Egypt (Exodus 5-9). Reference: The British Library,
Add. Ms. 14762.
The artist has represented an astonishing blue device hovering in the sky. The picture
shows an object with four circular structures or openings, surrounded by flames and what
appear to be bloody explosions. The hand of God at the end of a reddish-brown sleeve is
extended below it, pointing to the assembled-and somewhat astonished - Hebrews. A
flame is burning atop a nearby column.
The illustration represents a well-known event, the Seventh Plague sent against the
Egyptians. The arm in the picture is textually referred to as "God's outstretched arm."
Here is the relevant Old Testament passage, as used by Jews today:

262

Fig. 41: Moses and the blue object
Shemot (Exodus) 9:23-24: And Moshe stretched out his rod towards heaven: and
HaShem sent thunder and hail; and the fire rained down upon the ground; and
HaShem rained hail upon the land of Mitzrayim. So there was hail and fire
flaring up amidst the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the
land of Mitzrayim since it became a nation.

The image is from a 15th century manuscript composed and illuminated by Joel ben
Simeon. That is, an illustration created 3,000 years after the event. It shows the fire (red
and yellow) and hail (grey) sent by God. While the text itself does not mention any flying
object in the sky, the artist, possibly influenced by tradition, has felt it necessary to display
God's manifestation in the form of something resembling a flying machine.

Ca. 1440 BC, Elim, Sinai Desert, Arabic Peninsula
Manna Machine
The Zohar, a sacred Jewish text, describes a device miraculously providing food for the
Hebrews as they flee:

" There are three upper heads; two, and one which contains them. The dew of the
white head drops into the skull of the Small-faced One and there is it stored. And those
parts which are found in the beard, they are shaped and lead downwards in many
directions. In his lower eyes there are a left and a right eye, and these two have two
colors, except when they are seen in the white light of the upper eye. "

Modern writers have speculated that in this puzzling text the ancient Hebrews, who
lacked a technical vocabulary, used anatomical analogies to describe a complex flying
machine that generated food to sustain the crowd as it moved through the desert.

Fig. 42: The Manna Machine
The Bible never tells us exactly what manna was and where it came from, but there are
many Old Testament passages which describe its physical qualities and conditions
associated with its appearance. The Bible's first reference to manna is in the Book of
Exodus as the children of Israel are fleeing from Egypt and follow Moses into the
wilderness. After six weeks of wandering, they begin complaining to Moses that they are
tired and hungry. What happens next is truly extraordinary:

" Then said the LORD unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you;
and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them,
whether they will walk in my law or not (16:4).'

263

And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay
a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on the ground (16: 14). And when the
children of Israel saw it, they said one to another: It is manna, for they knew not what it
was. And Moses said unto them, 'This is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat.'"
Before 1200 BC
Mesopotamia's dark meteors and standing fireballs
At the dawn of recorded history, Mesopotamian tablets deserve a mention, if only because
a popular author, Zechariah Sitchin, has offered an interpretation of some passages in
terms of visits by astronauts from other planets (notably in The Twelfth Planet, Avon
Books 1978).
It is a fact that some cuneiform literature deals with interesting celestial anomalies.
Assyriologists have recognized these writings to be astromantic in nature, that is, texts
explaining how to forecast the future by watching meteoric phenomena, as opposed to
astrology, which deals with the movements of the planets. Some of these records are from
1200 BC or earlier, and were written in Hittite, but it is thought that they were copied
from older Akkadian originals, not yet located.
The vast majority of these texts described phenomena that can be explained today as
the natural observation of meteors, fireballs, and comets. The scribes did not generally
report on specific incidents that had occurred but rather provided meanings to particular
kinds of sightings. A handful of cuneiform references to sky phenomena have puzzled
archaeologists and astronomers. For example, the following text: "If a fireball moves
across the Wagon-Star and stands..." seems to describe a meteor that stays motionless in
the sky. The word "sallummu" has been translated as "fireball" but it very literally could
have been anything bright passing through the sky that stood still. One possibility is that

'sallummu' was a meteor train that remained visible for some time across the face of the
Wagon Star (Ursa Major), but the original text is not clear enough to reach a conclusion.
Other texts mention a more complex picture: "Two great stars flashed one after the
other in the middle watch." (R. Campbell Thompson, The Reports of the Magicians and

Astrologers of Nineveh and Babylon Luzac & Co., London 1900, 202)

264

The "dark meteors" were among other mysterious objects described in cuneiform. For
example: "If a meteor comes from above the Wagon Star and is dark and passes at the
right of the man: that man will see injury." Since meteorites passing overhead are
necessarily luminous or fiery rather than dark it is tempting to retain such quotes as
indication of an exceptional phenomenon, but the context is so vague that it is ultimately
anyone's guess. To the extent that no date is associated with the observation, we have not
retained these cases in our chronology.

Circa 852 BC, Bath, England
Did this English King crash a Druid Airship?
According to writer John Michell (1967), King Bladud is said to have been killed at Troja
Nova, in the London area, when riding a "druid airship" that crashed into the temple of
Apollo.
Although Bladud is legendary, the story of his flight has some factual basis. The
trouble is, the legend doesn't mention a druid airship but only chicken feathers! Bladud, or
Blaiddyd, was the legendary founder of Bath. His son was King Lear, whose story
William Shakespeare famously adapted for the theater. There is no evidence that Bladud
actually existed before Geoffrey of Monmouth named him in his History of the Kings of
Britain (1135), where he is said to have been the tenth ruler in line from Brutus.

This legend has enjoyed centuries of embellishments. Usually it is said that young
Bladud contracted leprosy in Athens and was banished from his native kingdom on return
to Britain. Years went by, during which he lived as a swineherd in Swainswick, on the
outskirts of present-day Bath, where he discovered by accident that the mud of a bog in
the marshy ground could cure skin diseases in pigs. The prince wallowed in the mud
himself to see what effect it had on his own lesions, and eventually managed to cure
himself completely. He then returned to Court, where he was welcomed. On his father's
death Bladud became king himself. He founded the city of Bath and there built the temple
of Aqua Sullis, dedicated to Minerva, goddess of healing.
According to this legend, Bladud practiced magical arts, such as necromancy, and this
led him to conduct an experiment. He constructed some wings from chicken feathers, ai$
attempted to fly towards (or from) the Temple of Apollo in New Troy, present-day
London. Unfortunately he fell and broke his neck. How this quaint legend entered UFO
databases is a complete mystery to us! See also Fabyan, The Chronicles (1516) f. viii and
H. C. Levis, The British King Who Tried to Fly (London: 1919).
5

479 BC, Athens, Greece
What was the flying object at the battle of Salamis?
A "horn-shaped object" is said to have flown over during the battle of Salamis (Salamine)
near Athens, Greece, between the Greeks and the Persians. The term "horned star" has
often been used to describe comets.
Upon consulting Cometography: A Catalogue of Comets by Gary W. Kronk and
Brian G. Marsden (Cambridge University Press, 1999, 154) we find that interestingly,
these authors do include the Salamis observation in their catalogue, calling it a Cerastes
type comet.

Pliny writes in his Natural History (Book II, Chapter XXII) that "There are stars that
suddenly come to birth in the heaven itself; of these there are several kinds. The Greeks
call them 'comets,' in our language 'long-haired stars,' because they have a blood-red
shock of what looks like shaggy hair at their top. The Greeks also give the name of
'bearded stars' to those from whose lower part spreads a mane resembling a long beard.
'Javelin-stars' quiver like a dart; these are a very terrible portent."

*

336 BC, Venice, Italy
Alexander the Great, and the UFO that shook Venice
According to a letter he wrote to Aristotle, Alexander the Great seized Venice when an
object came down from the sky, shot a beam, and crumbled the walls. This is an entirely
spurious account: We traced the story and discovered it was about the use of gunpowder,
not an unexplained flying object. The Aristotle letter is a known medieval forgery, only
famous because Dante mentions it.

*

330 BC: Sur (Tyre), Lebanon: Great silver shields
Two strange craft were seen to dive repeatedly at Alexander's army. They looked like
great silver shields that went back up into the sky over the Macedonian camp. These
"flying shields" flew in triangular formation, led by a large object, while the others were
smaller by almost half. In all there were five. They circled slowly over Tyre while
thousands of warriors on both sides stood and watched them in astonishment. Suddenly

266

from the largest "shield" came a lightning flash that struck the walls, which crumbled.
Unfortunately, no book about Alexander the Great contains the account. The story came
from American writer Frank Edwards in 1959, who provided no reference.

Fig. 43: An interpretation of Alexander's "silver shields"
In 1966 Italian writer Fenoglio (the man who invented the Alengon story and many others)
embellished the tale. He did not give a reference either, except to say that Alexander's
historian recorded the event. The problem is that Alexander's historian was Callisthenes,
whose "Deeds of Alexander" are lost.
Fenoglio also states 19th century historian Gustavo Droysen "intentionally does not
cite it, believing it to be a fantasy of the Macedonian soldiers." In 1970 Gordon Creighton
referred to the sighting in Flying Saucer Review. He mentioned Edwards' name but added
details from Fenoglio. He stated that he did not know an original source. In 1976 another
English researcher, W. Raymond Drake, interpreted Edwards' and Fenoglio's versions as
two separate events, one in Venice and one in Tyre. He misread the article of 1966 and
understood Fenoglio had actually quoted from Droysen.

Until some original source can be located, we are left with the suggestion that
Alexander's army at Tyre simply witnessed fiery projectiles, some sort of flaming
weapon.
Ca. 300 BC, Kun-Lun Mountains, China
The Charioteer of the Moon
According to Professor Couliano, Taoist K'u Yuan (or Qu Yuan) flew with Wang-Shu,"
the charioteer of the Moon," in a chariot drawn by dragons.

Fig. 44: Qu Yuan, from the Ming Dynasty

The lady charioteer crops up in many florid poems, like this one, The Sorrow of
Separation, by K'u Yuan (340-278 BC). It gave rise to the idea that he traveled with the
moon entity, but in fact it is just a well-known poem, full of metaphor. The verse most
relevant to our reference is this:

I could, for the time being, roam leisurely and remain carefree.
I let the moon-driver Wangshu act as leader
And told the wind-god Feilian to follow closely.
A phoenix acted as vanguard.
The thunder god told me that luggage was not ready.
I ordered the phoenix to fly fast, day and night.
A cyclone gathered around, leading clouds to welcome me.
133 BC, Amiterno, 70 Roman miles NE of Rome, Italy
Sun at night
This case is not to be confused with the sighting at Amiterno in 218 BC mentioned in our
Chronology.
The literature of the UFO field often quotes this later event, with the mention that
"Under the consulate of Africanus and Fabius, the sun was seen shining at midnight." In
reality this object probably was a comet, as recorded by Lucius Annaeus Seneca and
Marcus Junianus Justinus in their books. According to Seneca, during the reign of Attalus
III, King of Pergamum, "a comet appeared, of moderate size at first. Then it rose up and
spread out and went all the way to the equator, so that its vast extent equaled the region of
the sky which is called the Milky Way" (Quaestiones Naturales).

Justinus noted that at the birth of Mithradates VI Eupator "a comet burned so brightly
for 70 days that the entire sky seemed to be on fire. In its greatness it filled a quarter of the
heavens, and with its brilliance it outshone the sun, while its rising and setting each took a
period of four hours." (Historiae Philippicae). While there is no proof both writers were
referring to the same event, the reign of Attalus III has been dated from 137 to 132 BC,
while Mithradates VI Eupator was born between 133 and 131 BC. The descriptions do
seem to coincide. Furthermore, a Chinese document, the Han shu, records that a
spectacular comet was seen between August and September 134 BC lasting 30 days, while
the twelfth century text, T'ungkien kangmu, notes the reign changed due to a comet seen
in 133 BC.

85 BC, Roman Empire: Burning shield
"In the consulship of Lucius Valerius and Gaius Marius a burning shield scattering sparks
ran across the sky at sunset from west to east." (Pliny: Natural History Book II, Chapter
XXXIV.)
The description matches the behavior of an ordinary meteor. There is also a date
problem with this item. The consulship in 85 BC was held by Cornelius Cinna III and
Papirius Carbo I, not the people mentioned. The only consulship held by two people
named as in Pliny's claim, C. Marius VI and L. Valerius Flaccus, was in 100 BC. Several
sources were checked, including Who's Who in the Roman World by John Hazel
(Routledge UK, 2002, 110). Valerius did, however, become a suffect consul in 86 BC,
which may be the source of the error.

268

72 BC, Phrygia, near Otryae, Turkey
A falling meteorite stops a battle
At the time of the war between Lucullus and Mithridates, "Marius, whom Sertorius had
sent out of Spain to Mithridates with forces under him, stepping out and challenging him,
prepared for battle. In the very instant before joining battle, without any perceptible
alteration preceding, on a sudden the sky opened, and a large luminous body fell down in
the midst between the armies, in shape like a hogshead, but in color like melted silver,
insomuch that both armies in alarm withdrew. This wonderful prodigy happened in
Phrygia, near Otryae." (Plutarch's Lives: Lucullus, translated by John Dryden, 1683.)
There is no reason to believe this object was anything but a natural phenomenon.

68 BC, China: A "Guest Star" hovers over the land
The Han Shu, composed in 100 AD, reports that a "guest star" was observed during "first
watch of the night" on July 23rd 68 BC. It "stayed between the left and the right star of
Chio, pointing southeastward and measuring about 2 degrees. Its color was white." (Han
Shu p.46)
While this particular phenomenon has yet to be identified, it must be noted that the
Han Shu uses the same wording to describe the appearance of comet Swift-Tuttle in
August of the same year. The Han Shu records many such sightings with great precision,
and modern astronomers correlate them to records of comets.

62 BC, Roman Empire: Flashes of fire

Dio Cassius, in his Roman History (c. 229 AD), writes "in the west flashes of fire darted
up into heaven." There are many such reports in records of that period, and they are often
quoted in UFO chronologies. However they are so vague that they could describe several
natural phenomena, including meteors, comets or auroral displays.

July 43 BC: The Comet of Murtine, Croatia
Pliny the Elder tells that Augustus wrote "On the very days of my games, a comet was
visible over the course of seven days, in the northern region of the heavens. It rose at
about the eleventh hour of the day and was bright and plainly seen from all lands. The
common people believed that this star signified the soul of Caesar had been received
among the spirits of the immortal gods. On this account, it was added as an adornment to
the head of the statue of Caesar that I, not long afterwards, dedicated in the Forum."
Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus included Augustus' account in his book The Lives of the
Caesars, and Seneca also mentions it in Quaestiones Naturales, stating the phenomenon
appeared at the 11th hour of the day. Plutarch, Siculus and Obsequens all wrote about it,
as well as Servius in his commentaries on Virgil's Eclogue and Aeneid in the 4th century.
Servius relates the phenomenon was observed in the daytime and lasted for three days, but
he was writing long after the event. Astronomers believe there could be a link with a
comet recorded in the Han Shu for May and June 43 BC.
269

Circa 5 BC, Galilee: The Star of Bethlehem

The birth of Christ presents us with a remarkable, if controversial, report of an
extraordinary star. It is often cited in the UFO literature as an example of the relationship
between signs in the sky, celestial beings and human reproduction. A very bright object
was reportedly seen in the sky, leading the three Magi to the place where Jesus was born.
Many possible explanations have been advanced for this "Star of Bethlehem," thought by
some to be Venus, or a nova. The lack of a precise date or even year for the birth of Jesus
makes it difficult to reach a definite conclusion about the nature of this celestial object.

Fig. 45: The Star of Bethlehem
The New Testament describes an encounter between a young woman named Mary and an
entity from the sky, described as an angel: "The angel Gabriel was sent by God to a town
in Galilee called Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph, of the House of

David; and the virgin's name was Mary. He went in and said to her, Rejoice, so highly
favored! The Lord is with you.'"
"She was deeply disturbed by these words and asked herself what this greeting
could mean, but the angel said to her, 'Mary, do not be afraid; you have won
God's favor. Listen! You are to conceive and bear a Son, and you must name him
Jesus. He will be great and will be called Son of the Most High.The Lord God
will give him the throne of his ancestor David; he will rule over the House of
Jacob forever and his reign will have no end." (Luke 1:26-38)
This scene has inspired numerous painters, who consistently show a light above
Mary, sometimes associated with a bird, and the angel speaking to her. We will return t(?
the question of artistic representation of such events in Part III. Interestingly, the
thirteenth-century Golden Legend of Jacques de Voragine, an authoritative source on the
lives of the Saints and the chronology of Catholic feasts, questions the nature of the star:
"Some say that it was the Holy Ghost, Who had taken this form in order to guide the
Magi. Others think it was an angel who also appeared to the shepherds. Still others, with
whom we agree, are of the opinion that it was a heavenly body newly created, and that
once it had fulfilled its mission, it was absorbed once more into the matter of the
universe."

70

Ca. 28 AD, Jerusalem: Judas enters a luminous cloud
"Look, you have been told everything," Jesus says to Judas after whispering secrets to his
friend and most loyal follower. "Lift up your eyes and look at the cloud and the light

within it and the stars surrounding it. The star that leads the way is your star." Judas lifted
his eyes and saw the luminous cloud, and he entered it.
Source: The Gospel of Judas, a newly-deciphered Coptic codex released in 2006 by the
National Geographic Society, Washington, D.C.

Circa 249, Britain: A terrible bloody sword in the air
"At his [Decius'] coming to the Throne it Rained Blood in divers parts of this Kingdom,
and a Terrible Bloody Sword was seen in the Air for three Nights, a little after
Sunset." (Britton, C.E., A Meteorological Chronology to A.D. 1450, London: H.M.S.O.,
1937, 13.) Note that Trajan Decius was emperor from 249 to 251. We conclude this refers
to a classic comet.

312, near Verona, Italy
A pagan Emperor sees a cross in the sky
Emperor Constantine and others see a luminous cross in the sky. The emperor establishes
Christianity in Rome.

Fig. 46: The vision of Emperor Constantine
Note that luminous crosses in the sky are not very unusual. They are caused by refraction
phenomena similar to what one may observe by looking at a bright light through the mesh
of a screen door. In this particular case the emperor is said to have seen luminous writing
that read "In hoc signo vinces" (You will win through this Sign), which would eliminate
the optical phenomenon as a simple explanation. However the writing may have been seen
(or even heard) in a vision rather than an actual observation in the sky.
271

In his remarkable book, L 'Atmosphere et les Grands Phenomenes de la Nature (Paris:

Hachette 1905), Camille Flammarion gives many examples of similar phenomena caused
by reflexions or refraction due to ice crystals or water droplets in the atmosphere. Whether
the cross was a natural phenomenon or not, this case is so important that it deserves
special comments. There are two main sources for the story. One comes from Eusebius,

the other from Lactantius. They do not provide an exact location, and contain
contradictions. (The later sources are historically not very valuable.)

Fig. 47: Cross-shaped atmospheric illusions
Eusebius described the same events in the life of Constantine in two separate books. In the
earliest of these he does not refer to the cross in the sky, literally as if it had never
happened. In the later book he tells that before Constantine marched to Rome to battle
Maxentius, he and all his soldiers witnessed a cross in the sky. That night, when asleep,
the emperor had a dream in which Christ instructed him to make a copy of the sign they
had seen, for use in all future battles. Lactantius, on the other hand, did not mention the
cross in the sky at all. Instead he wrote that Constantine, while in the vicinity of Rome and
before the battle with Maxentius, was simply instructed in a dream to use a special
symbol, not forever but in the battle at hand.
Eusebius wrote that the symbol consisted of a cross with the Christ monogram (the
chi-roh) at the top. Lactantius wrote that the symbol was itself the chi-roh.
Constantine had already experienced a vision in 310 AD, as the appearance of the
pagan god, Apollo, whom the emperor worshipped as a sun god. It is odd that he should
have met gods from two opposing religions in the space of two years. The inference is that

Constantine's only real vision was in 310 AD, and that he or someone else recycled it for
the conversion story of 312 AD. Constantine had already used the sign of the cross (even
the Latin cross) on his coins before his conversion, in reference to the Sun.

353, Antioch (Antalaya), Syria
Amazing luminous cross
As Constantius the Victorious, proclaimed Gallus as Caesar, he saw a cross in the form of
a column of light appear in the western sky over Antioch.
"After these things, the Emperor Constantius having created Gallus his kinsman
Caesar, and given him his own name, sent him to Antioch in Syria, providing thus for the
guarding of the eastern parts. When Gallus was entering this city, the Savior's sign
appeared in the East: for a pillar in the form of a cross seen in the heavens gave occasion
of great amazement to the spectators." (Ecc. Hist. 2.28.2)

272

Source: Chronicle of Michael the Syrian, Jacobite patriarch of Antioch: 1166-1199 A.D.),
who took this story from Socrates (Ecclesiastical History, Book II).

384, Roman Empire: A pillar in the sky

"A terrible sign appeared in the sky, shaped like a pillar (columna). It was in the time of
the Roman Emperor, Theodosius." A number of atmospheric phenomena, or a comet, can
produce this effect.

Source: Lycosthenes, op. cit., 279.

393 (or 390), Roman Empire
Brilliant globes, swarming like bees
A brilliant globe is observed close to Venus. Many others join in, "swarming like bees."
The first reference for this item is Bougard, Inforespace no. 22 (August 1975) p.34,

quoting Lycosthenes Prodigiorum ac Ostentorum Chronicon.

Further research shows that the primary source is historian Philostorgius, in his
Ecclesiasticae Historiae (composed in 425 AD). He wrote that after Theodosius I returned
to Rome following a victory over Clemens Maximus, there appeared "a new and strange
star...which announced the coming of very great calamities upon the world." It was first
seen at midnight in the east and was said to be "large and bright, and in brilliance it was
not much inferior to the morning star (...) A concourse of stars gathered around it on
every side, like a swarm of bees."
Later "the light of all the stars mingled together" and the object took on the
appearance of a huge double-edged sword. It lasted for 40 days. Our conclusion: the
object probably was a comet, which was actually visible in 390 AD.

Circa 523, Kent, Britain
Weird sky phenomena, drops of blood
"In his time strange sights were seen of Dragons, Lions and other furious wild Beasts
Fighting in the Air. In the West of Kent it Rained Wheat, and soon after great Drops of
Blood, upon which ensued extream Dearth..."
Scholar C. E. Britton comments: "Vaguely allocated to the reigh of Octa (ca.
513-533). Legendary."
Here we have a further challenge, since nothing indicates that these events were
correlated at all, or even happened at te same time. (Britton, C.E., A Meteorological
Chronology to A.D. 1450, London: H.M.S.O., 1937.)

553, Clonfert, Ireland
Saint Brendan flies up into the sky
Another early instance of what would be called "abduction" today took place when
"Brennain of Birra was seen ascending in a chariot into the sky this year."
This refers to Saint Brendan ("Breanainn") of Clonfert (ca. 484 - ca. 578), an early
Irish monastic saint sometimes believed to have sailed to America.
Source: The Annals of the Four Masters, historical chronicles compiled in the 17th
century by four friars of the Abbey of Donegal in Bundrowes, near Bundoran. They are

also known as The Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland.

273

577, France
Mock suns, and a glittering star in the moon
"Thereafter, on the night of the third day of the Ides of November, while we were
celebrating the vigil of the Holy Martin, there appeared to us a great wonder. A glittering
star was seen to shine in the center of the Moon; above and below the Moon appeared
other stars all near to it, and round about it was the circle which is wont to portend rain.
We know not what these things signified.
"And often in this year we saw the Moon darkened, and before Christmastide there
was a loud thunder. Moreover, there appeared around the sun the meteors which the
country people also call suns, such as those described by me as visible before the calamity
in Auvergne.
"It was declared that the sea had risen beyond its usual bounds, and many other signs
were seen."
Here again, the sightings are consistent with natural phenomena.
Source: Gregory of Tours, History of the Franks, Volume 23, trans. O. M. Dalton
(Oxford, 1927), 198.

584, France, exact location unknown: A battle of lights
Many witnesses. Brilliant rays of light hitting one another in the sky.

Given the lack of details, some natural phenomena (such as an aurora borealis) could
produce this effect. However we cannot completely reject the case on the basis of the
information given, and the source is impeccable.
Source: Gregory of Tours, History of the Franks, op. cit.

*

September 585, France, exact location unknown
Domes in the sky
"The kind of domes people are used to seeing " cross the sky rapidly. Here again we seeft¥

to have a tantalizing hint that widespread rumors existed about very unusual aerial objects,
of round shape. However, a thorough check of the chronicles of Gregoire de Tours fails to
disclose such a description: is there a translation error here, on the part of a usually
reliable author?
Source: Inforespace 22 (August 1975): 35. M. Bougard quotes Gregory of Tours, History

of the Franks, op. cit.

610, Medina, Saudi Arabia Angel apparition to Islam's prophet

This event concerns the apparition of angel Gabriel to 40-year old Mohammed, Islam's
prophet. Muhammad received his first revelation on the mountain of Hira outside Mecca,
while he searched for solitude. At the time of the contact with the angel he first
experienced great pain, and feared that he was going to die.
The first fraction of the Koran Muhammad received is believed to be the beginning of
Sura 96:

"Recite in the name of your Lord, who created mankind from clots of blood. Recite,
and your Lord will be bountiful He who has taught by the pen taught mankind what was
not known. "

One could argue that this event does not include any description of an aerial
phenomenon, and thus does not belong in this compilation. However it does involve an
entity from the sky (an angel) and an episode of contact with transmission of a message
that has had a major impact on men's beliefs - an impact that continues to this day. In that
sense it epitomizes the complexity of "contact" claims that are an integral part of the
phenomenon, both in a social sense and in the larger scope of the societal significance of
the relationship between men and the higher worlds in which they believe.

Fig. 48: The apparition to Mohammed
14 January 616, China
A fireball kills 10 people among rebels
The History of the Sui Dynasty, 581-618 records a spectacular fireball that fell into a
rebel's camp, partly destroying it. This is interesting because many UFO accounts deal
with enemies being frightened or persecuted by mysterious lights - such as when the
Christians fought the Turks. This narrative leaves no doubt that the phenomenon had
natural causes.
The Chinese document states, "A large shooting star like a bushel fell onto the rebel
Lu Ming-yueh's camp. It destroyed his wall-attacking tower and crushed to death more
than 10 people."
Source: Kevin Yau, Paul Weissman and Donald Yeomans, "Meteorite falls in China anc?
some related human casualty events," Meteoritics 29 (1994): 867.

After 618, China
Capture of a celestial ship - It flies away!

75

The Dong Tien Ji (Peeping on the Sky) says: "In the Tang Dynasty a celestial ship, over
50 feet long, was found and placed in the Ling De Hall. The ship gave out a metallic
sound when struck, and was of very hard material which was rustproof.
Li Deyu, the Tang Prime Minister, cut over a foot of a slender, long stick of the ship
and carved it into a figure of a Taoist priest. The Taoist figurine flew away and then
returned. In the years of Emperor Darning, the figurine disappeared and the ship also flew
away."

Source: Paul Dong, China's Major Mysteries: Paranormal Phenomena and the
Unexplained in the people's Republic of China (China books, 2000), 68-9.
637, Japan: The Barking of the celestial dog
A great star floated from East to West and there was a noise, like that of thunder. The
people of that day said it was the sound of the falling star. Others said that it was earththunder. Hereupon the Buddhist Priest, Bin, said, "It is not the falling star but the Celestial
Dog, the sound of whose barking is like thunder."
Source: Nihongi or Chronicles of Japan (London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1956). Quoted by
W. Raymond Drake in Gods and Spacemen in the Ancient East (London: Sphere, 1973),

104.

24 March 639, Japan, exact location unknown
Noisy star
A big star flew from east to west with a roar like thunder. Min, a Buddhist priest, said it
was star Amagitune, which is said to mean, "Fox lives in the sky."
In spite of the reported sound, we would argue this was a meteor. For a long time,
scientists discounted reports of sounds in connection with meteors, because the speed of
sound is so slow compared to light that any sound should only be audible well after the
passage of the meteor. Only recently was it realized that the perception of sound can be
created inside the skull of the witness by microwaves propagating at the same speed as the
light itself.
Source: Morihiro Saitho, Nihon-Tenmonshiriyou, Chapter 7, "Meteor, The messenger
from space."

640, Faremoutiers-en-Brie, France
A Virtuous Virgin is taken to Heaven
"In the year of our Lord 640, Eadbald, king of Kent, departed this life, and left his
kingdom to his son Earconbert, who governed it most nobly 24 years and some months.
His daughter Earcongota, as became the offspring of such a parent, was a most virtuous
virgin, serving God in a monastery in the country of the Franks, built by a most noble
abbess, named Fara, at a place called Brie. Many wonderful works and miracles of this
virgin, dedicated to God, are to this day related by the inhabitants of that place; but for us
it shall suffice to say something briefly of her departure out of this world to the heavenly
27

kingdom. The day of her summoning drawing near, (...) she let (others) know that her
death was at hand, as she had learnt by revelation, which she said she had received in this
manner:
"She had seen a band of men, clothed in white, come into the monastery, and being
asked by her what they wanted, and what they did there, they answered they had been sent
thither to carry away with them the gold coin that had been brought thither from Kent.
Towards the close of that same night, as morning began to dawn, leaving the darkness of
this world, she departed to the light of heaven. Many of the brethren of that monastery
who were in other houses, declared they had then plainly heard choirs of singing angels,
and, as it were, the sound of a multitude entering the monastery. Whereupon going out

immediately to see what it might be, they beheld a great light coming down from heaven,
which bore that holy soul, set loose from the bonds of the flesh, to the eternal joys of the

celestial country. They also tell of other miracles that were wrought that night in the same
monastery by the power of God."
Source: Bede the Venerable, Ecclesiastical History of England, trans. A. M. Sellar
(London: George Bell & Sons, 1907).

Circa 685, Lindsey, England
Miracles from Heaven chase the Devil away
How a light from Heaven stood all night over King Oswald's relics, and how those
possessed with devils were healed by them: "I think we ought not to pass over in silence

the miracles and signs from Heaven that were shown when King Oswald's bones were
found, and translated into the church where they are now preserved.
"It was revealed by a sign from Heaven with how much reverence they ought to be

received by all the faithful; for all that night, a pillar of light, reaching from the wagon &p
to heaven, was visible in almost every part of the province of Lindsey. Hereupon, in the

morning, the brethren of that monastery who had refused it the day before, began
themselves earnestly to pray that those holy relics, beloved of God, might be laid among
them. (...) Then they poured out the water in which they had washed the bones, in a
corner of the cemetery. From that time, the very earth which received that holy water had
the power of saving grace in casting out devils from the bodies of persons possessed.
"Lastly, there came to visit her (the queen) a certain venerable abbess, who is still
living, called Ethelhild, the sister of the holy men, Ethelwinand Aldwin, the first of whom
was bishop in the province of Lindsey, the other abbot of the monastery of Peartaneu; not
far from which was the monastery of Ethelhild. When this lady was come, in a
conversation between her and the queen, the discourse turning upon Oswald, she said, that

she also had that night seen the light over his relics reaching up to heaven. The queen

thereupon added, that the very dust of the pavement on which the water that washed the
bones had been poured out, had already healed many sick persons.
"The abbess thereupon desired that some of that health-bringing dust might be given
her, and, receiving it, she tied it up in a cloth, and, putting it into a casket, returned home.
"Some time after, when she was in her monastery, there came to it a guest, who was
wont to be grievously tormented with an unclean spirit at night; he being hospitably
entertained, when he had gone to bed after supper, was suddenly seized by the Devil, and
began to cry out, to gnash his teeth, to foam at the mouth, and to writhe and distort his
limbs. (...) When no hope appeared of easing him in his ravings, the abbess bethought
herself of the dust, and immediately bade her handmaiden go and fetch her the casket in
which it was. As soon as she came with it, as she had been bidden, and was entering the
hall of the house, in the inner part whereof the possessed person was writhing in torment,

he suddenly became silent, and laid down his head, as if he had been falling asleep,
stretching out all his limbs to rest. 'Silence fell upon all and intent they gazed,' anxiously
waiting to see the end of the matter. And after about the space of an hour the man that had
been tormented sat up, and fetching a deep sigh, said, 'Now I am whole, for I am restored
to my senses.'"

Source: Bede the Venerable, Ecclesiastical History of England, op. cit.

April 750, Cordoba, Spain: Three suns, a sickle of fire
"In the nones of April, on Sunday during the first, second and almost the third hours, all
the citizens of Cordoba saw three suns which shone and twinkled in a wonderful way
preceded by a sickle of fire and emerald; and, from its appearance, by order of God, his
angels devastated all the inhabitants of Spain with intolerable hunger."
Source: Cronica Mozarabe of the year 754 (or "Continuatio Hispana de San Isidoro").

778: Notre-Dame de Sabart (Ariege, France)
Luminous virgin

Tradition states that the Sabart sanctuary, near Tarascon, dates from the Great
Charlemagne. The emperor dedicated a chapel to Notre-Dame in recognition of her help in
his fight against the Saracens. The sanctuary is the site of a pilgrimage on September 8th
According to legend, a luminous virgin was unearthed at this place by two heifers led by
Charlemagne himself. The chapel is adorned with a wonderful stained glass window
dating from the thirteenth century, the oldest such window in the Midi.
Source: Rene Alleau, Guide de la France Mysterieuse (Paris: Tchou, 1964).

793, Northumbria, England: Fiery Dragons, Evil Men
According to the Anglo Saxon chronicle, "Here in this year, dire portents appeared over
Northumbria, and sorely terrified the people. They consisted of immense whirlwinds and
flashes of lightning, and fiery dragons were seen flying in the air.
A great famine immediately followed those signs, and a little after that in the same
year, on 8 June, the ravages of heathen men miserably destroyed God's church on the
island of Lindisfarne, with plunder and manslaughter."
These descriptions are consistent with electrical storms, possibly associated with
tornadoes.

Source: G. P. Cubbin, ed., The Anglo Saxon Chronicle, A Collaborative Edition, vol. 6
(Cambridge: Boydell & Brewer, 1996), 17.

819, Clent, Shropshire, England: Beam of light
A column of white light projects a beam towards a thorn tree where rested the head of
murdered King Kenelm.
The connection with aerial phenomena is very tenuous indeed, yet this event is quoted
in the literature of the field as if it was unidentified.
Source: Delair J Bernard, UFO Register (1971), quoting the Chronicles of Richard of
Cirencester.

About 1000, Europe: Flying cross
A rare book entitled Aragon reyno de Cristo y dote de Maria SS. ma fundado sobre la
columna immobile de Nuestra Senora de su Ciudad de Zaragoza, published in Zaragoza in

1739, mentions all kinds of celestial prodigies associated with religious images over the
centuries. Among these, two incidents of flying crosses are recorded. Neither case is dated
but they occurred at some time between the 10th and the 11th centuries. One of these was
the "Miraculous appearance of the Sacred Cross over the carrasca in the Royal Field of the
Town of Aynsa," when Captain Garci-Ximenez, soon to become the first king of
Sobrarbe, conquered the Moors of the town, "freeing it from Muslim tyranny."

Among so many fears, Garci-Ximenez turned his eyes to the Sky, asking the God of
Armies for help, and, as a presage of victory, He gave him a marvellous sign, a Sacred
Red Cross that appeared over a carrasca. The sight of this spurred Garci-Ximenez on, as if
he had heard the voice that Constantine the Great heard from the sky: "With this sign of
the Holy Cross you will overcome."
And, of course, they overcame. The second reference to a cross in the sky, under the
heading "Prodigious apparition of the Holy Cross over the valley of Arahones in the
ancient Kingdom of Sobrarbe." On this occasion, when the Christian troops, led by Inigo
Arista, try to reconquer a place called Campo del Rey, in Aragues, they are surrounded by
the Moors and ask Heaven for help. A cross then appears in the air, giving the Christians
the spirit they need to fight on.

29 June 1033, England: An eclipse and the Antichrist
"Just as the superstitious idolatries of Antichrist were arrived at their height by
overspreading the Christian world, upon June 29 (which is by some called St. Peter's day)
at six o'clock in the morning, a terrible eclipse of the sun happened, in which he became
like sapphire; so that it made men's countenances look pale, as if they had been dead; and
every thing in the air seemed of a saffron colour."
There is no unusual aerial phenomenon here, only an assumed connection between a
religious incident (the arrival of the Antichrist) and a solar eclipse.
28C

Source: John Howie, An Alarm unto a secure generation..., (Glasgow: John Bryce, 1780).

1066, River Setoml near Kiev, Ukraine
Red star and little man
The initial story we found stated that "in 1065" a dwarf-like entity was pulled out of the
river by a fisherman and thrown back, while local residents observed a strange sign in the
sky - a huge star with blood red beams of light.
"This phenomenon lasted for seven straight days. It was seen only during the evening.
Around the same time a child-like dwarf type entity was found by fishermen in the river
Setomi (this river does not exist at present). The dwarf was pulled out of the river in a net.
The fishermen kept watch over the strange entity until late afternoon and then threw it
back into the river out of fear and repugnancy. The dwarf like entity was very strange with
a very wrinkled face and other "shameless" details on his face and body."
Review of this case disclosed several problems: First, the year itself was incorrect: in
the "Povest Vremennyh Let" (Tale of Bygone Years) the date of incident is given as 1066.
Second, the "star with red beams" was none other than Halley's Comet! Its nearest
approach to the Earth was March 27, 1066. The "monster" was only a deformed child who
was dropped in the river Setoml (not Setomi) by his mother. His body was accidentally
found by the fishermen (the manuscript clearly stated this). This child even had its
genitalia on the face! Russian manuscripts often stated that the birth of "monstrous"
children was an omen or a curse for all peoples.
Source: Povest Vremennyh Let (an ancient manuscript), and Dmitri Lavrov in Ukrainian
News 18 Feb. 1998. Further research by Mikhail Gershtein, Magonia Exchange
(Magoniax) Project.

1 March 1095, Piacenza, Italy
Blue luminous dove, a great cross
In the public square, in front of the church of Saint Maria di Campagna, there was a
meeting of the most powerful figures of the century. It was March 1st, 1095, and the
preparations for the first crusade were under discussion. According to the legend, during
the assembly, just as Countess Matilde di Canossa began to speak, a blue, luminous dove
descended from the sky. Later, when these powerful leaders officially announced the
launch of the crusade, the clouds opened miraculously, the public square was bathed in 3
powerful light, and a great cross appeared in the sky, identical to that which appeared
before Emperor Constantine, with the words "In hoc signo vinces" written upon it.
Probably just a bit of Christian brand management at the time of the crusades...

81

Source: P. Carpi, Magia e segreti dell'Emilia-Romagna (Borelli: Modena, 1988), 114.

Eleventh-century Europe: Astronauts in trouble
A new genre of folktales developed in Medieval Europe between the 11th and the 13th
centuries. In these stories, a member of the aerial crew of a cloud ship runs into trouble as
he descends to retrieve a lost spear or loosen a trapped anchor. These wonderful tales were

told for a long time. Although it is likely they all derived from the same original source,
certain details were slightly altered in each retelling.
Aside from the issue of whether actual UFOs were seen during this period, which we
discussed in Part I of this book, tales of 'cloud ships' were retold and embroidered to
support the argument that mysterious beings traversed the sky with the ease that humans
travel over the sea in ships.
There was an almost universal belief that the world was composed of three levels or
'decks': the earth, the heavens and the marine kingdoms under the sea, between which it
was not impossible to travel in the right conditions or by following certain instructions.
For this reason, surreal stories of celestial sailing vessels dropping anchors upon the earth
or divers from above drowning in our air became believable urban myths in medieval
times. Consider the following account from Bishop Patrick's Hiberno-Latin Mirabilia
(1074-84 AD):

There was once a king of the Scots at a show
With a great throng, thousands in fair array.
Suddenly they see a ship sail past in the air,
And from the ship a man then cast a spear after a fish;
The spear struck the ground,
and he, swimming, plucked it out.
Who can hear this wonder
and not praise the Lord of Thunder?
Other Irish documents, such as the Book of Glendalough, composed in 1130, repeated the
same story of the airship and the fish in every detail. However, the Book ofLeinster
(ca. 1170), while stating that it occurred at the royal fair of Tailtiu, speaks of three ships in
the sky, and alleges that King Domhnall, son of Murchad, was among the witnesses. T h $

2

is interesting: Domhnall was the 161st Monarch of Ireland, reigning between 738 and 758
AD, and a report that a flying ship was seen in the sky in that period does in fact exist. The
Annals of Ulster, which covers the years 431 to 1588, states, albeit with no reference to
the fair or to the king, that as early as the year 749, "Ships with their crews were seen in
the air above Cluain Moccu Nois."
Another, much later work, The Annals of the Four Masters, a series of historical
chronicles compiled between 1632 and 1636 by four friars of the Abbey of Donegal in
Bundrowes, near Bundoran, states that, "Ships with their crews were seen in the air" in
743. As this book contains numerous errors we are more inclined to take the date of 749 as
the correct one. Was Domhnall, as opposed to Congalach, the royal witness in the original
version of the airship sighting?
We see these stories as interesting forerunners of the ufology era, with a series of
episodes in which the pattern shows either aerial voyagers in trouble, or airship operators
who adopt a posture conveying a message, such as an outstretched arm.
Source: Aubrey Gwynn, ed., The Writings of Bishop Patrick 1074-1084 (Dublin: Dublin
Institute for Advanced Studies, 1955), cited in Anchors in a three-decker world\ Miceal
Ross, Folklore Annual 1998. Note that the term "Scots" here refers to the Irish.

1211, Britain: Death of a sky visitor
But where is the Alien body?
In later retellings of the above story the motive behind the sailor's descent is a trapped
anchor, thus substituting the traditional spear for an object more suited to navigation.

Gervase of Tilbury collected a similar tale in his work, Otia Imperialia (1211 AD):
"As people were coming out of church in Britain, on a dark cloudy day, they saw a
ship's anchor fastened in a heap of stones, with its cable reaching up from it into the
clouds. Presently they saw the cable strained, as if the crew was trying to pull it up, but it
still stuck fast. Voices were then heard above the clouds, apparently in clamorous debate,
and a sailor came down the cable. As soon as he touched the ground the crowd gathered
around him, and he died, like a man drowned at sea, suffocated by our damp thick
atmosphere. An hour afterwards, his shipmates cut the cable and sailed away; and the
anchor they left behind was made into fastenings and ornaments for the church door, in
memory of this wondrous event."
It is not reported whether the dead sailor's body is shipped home in the airship, or
whether the deceased is given a Christian burial on earth. In either case, this would be the
first account of an aerial navigator that dies in an accident on our planet, some seven
centuries before Roswell.

283

1250, Cloena (Clonmacnoise)
A ship with occupants, captured anchor
Some forty years later, the story was repeated by the anonymous author of an influential
book written in Old Norse. The Kongs Skuggsjo, better known by its Latin name, the
Speculum Regale ["the king's mirror"], was written around 1250 AD. The event took
place in Clonmacnoise.

"There happened something once in the borough called Cloena, which will also seem
marvellous. In this town there is a church dedicated to the memory of a saint named
Kiranus. One Sunday while the populace was at church hearing mass, it befell that an

anchor was dropped from the sky as if thrown from a ship; for a rope was attached to it,
and one of the flukes of the anchor got caught in the arch above the church door. The
people all rushed out of the church and marvelled much as their eyes followed the
ropeupward.
"They saw a ship with men on board floating before the anchor cable; and soon they
saw a man leap overboard and dive down to the anchor as if to release it. The movements
of his hands and feet and all his actions appeared like those of a man swimming in the
water. When he came down to the anchor, he tried to loosen it, but the people immediately
rushed up and attempted to seize him. In this church where the anchor was caught, there
is a bishop's throne.
"The bishop was present when this occurred and forbade his people to hold the man;
for, said he, it might prove fatal as when one is held under water. As soon as the man was
released, he hurried back up to the ship; and when he was up the crew cut the rope and
the ship sailed away out of sight. But the anchor has remained in the church since then as
a testimony to this event. "
The strong Christian overtones are noticeable in this version. Here it is not a king but
a bishop who is present during the event, and the action occurs in the air above a church?
The fact that the diver is allowed to return to his ship unharmed is another moralistic
touch.
According to folklorist John Carey, the move from spears to anchors was due in part
to the popularity of another legend of the same period, in which the crew are aboard a ship
actually sailing in the sea, not in the sky. In this version, the anchor gets stuck in an
underwater monastery, to be freed by a blind boy who swims down and finds himself in a
subaquatic world.
84

Return of the celestial diver seven centuries later...in a Texas hoax!
In April 1897, in the middle of a wave of mysterious airship sightings, some American
newspapers published two British folktales from Gervase of Tilbury. One of these was
none other than the legend of the anchor and the church that we have cited above.
This article, entitled "A Sea Above the Clouds: Extraordinary Superstition Once
Prevalent in England," published first in the Boston Post, must have impressed one reader
at least, for a couple of weeks later an anonymous writer wove yet another airship yarn
from it.

Anchor of the Airship.
Said to Be on Exhibition at Merkel, Attracting Much Attention.
Merkel, Texas, April 26 - Some parties returning from church last night
noticed a heavy object dragging along with a rope attached. They followed it
until in crossing the railroad, it caught on a rail. On looking up they saw
what they supposed was the airship. It was not near enough to get an idea of
the dimensions. A light could be seen protruding from several windows; one
bright light in front like the headlight of a locomotive. After some 10
minutes a man was seen descending the rope; he came near enough to be
plainly seen.

He wore a light-blue sailor suit, was small in size. He stopped when he
discovered parties at the anchor and cut the ropes below him and sailed off
in a northeast direction.
The anchor is now on exhibition at the blacksmith shop of Elliott and Miller
and is attracting the attention of hundreds of people.
In this updated American version, railroad tracks replace the tombstone where the
anchor gets caught, and the pilot - dressed, naturally enough, in a sailor's suit - returns to
his craft safe and sound, but there can be no mistaking the origin of the tale.

1122, London, England
Another flying ship loses its anchor
Mr. Page, associate national correspondent of the French Antiquary Society, reports a
story told by a 12th century monk from Limousin named Geoffroy de Vigeois.

Fig. 49: Bulletin des Antiquaires
The event concerns a flying ship "navis sursum in aere," which landed in the middle of
London. The inhabitants rushed on the anchor of this ship, and the passengers were forced
to cut the rope in order to take to the air again.
"Mr. le Comte H.-F. Delaborde reminds us that Leonardo da Vinci has studied aerial
navigation, and was not the first. He assumes that the event may have originated with a
simple mirage. The legend must have grown as it traveled, as often happens."

Source: Geoffroi du Vigeois, Chronica, A.D. MCXXII, ed. Philippe Labbe, Nova

Bibliotheca manuscripta (Parisiis, 1657), II, 299-300; Bulletin de la Societe des
Antiquaires de France (1911): 102-103.
1141, Bingen, Germany
Figures within fiery flying disks

Sainte Hildegard, 41, reports: "Heaven was opened and a fiery light of exceeding
brilliance permeated my whole brain"
Hildegard of Bingen (1098-1179) was a remarkable woman, a pioneer in many fields.
At a time when few women wrote, Hildegard produced major works of theology and
visionary texts. Kristina Lerman, writing on the UCSB (Santa Barbara) website, observed:
"When few women were accorded respect, she was consulted by and advised bishops,
popes, and kings.
"She used the curative powers of natural objects for healing, and wrote treatises about
natural history and medicinal uses of plants, animals, trees and stones. She is the first
composer whose biography is known. She founded a vibrant convent, where her musical
plays were performed. Revival of interest in this extraordinary woman of the middle ages
was initiated by musicologists and historians of science and religion."
As a girl, Hildegard started to have visions of luminous objects at the age of three.
She soon realized she was unique in this ability and hid this gift for many years.

Fig. 50: Visionary painting by Sainte Hildegard
However, in 1141, Hildegard had a vision of God that gave her instant understanding of
the meaning of the religious texts, and commanded her to write down everything she
would observe:

"And it came to pass... when I was 42years and 7 months old, that the heavens wer&*
opened and a blinding light of exceptional brilliance flowed through my entire brain. And
so it kindled my whole heart and breast like a flame, not burning but warming... "
It is now generally agreed that Sainte Hildegard suffered from migraine, and that her
experiences were a result of this condition. The way she describes her visions, the
precursors and the debilitating aftereffects, points to classic symptoms of migraine

sufferers. Although a number of visual hallucinations may occur, the more common ones
described are the "scotomata" that often follow perceptions of phosphenes in the visual
field. Scintillating scotomata are also associated with areas of total blindness in the visual
field, something Hildegard might have been describing when she spoke of points of
intense light, and also the "extinguished stars."
Migraine attacks are usually followed by sickness, paralysis, blindness - all reported
by Hildegard, and when they pass, by a period of rebound and feeling better than before, a
euphoria also described by her. Among the strangest and most intense symptoms of
migraine aura, are the occurrences of feelings of sudden familiarity and certitude... or its
opposite. Such states are experienced, momentarily and occasionally, by everyone; their
occurrence in migraine auras is marked by their overwhelming intensity and relatively
long duration. As Kristina Lerman notes, "It is a tribute to the remarkable spirit and the
intellectual powers of this woman that she was able to turn a debilitating illness into the
word of God, and create so much with it."

September 1157, Germany
Three suns, three moons
Lunar halo, mock moons, sundogs and crosses of light are represented in this medieval
book.

Fig. 51: Phenomena in Germany
The text reads:
"In the month of September, there were seen three suns in a clear sky [and more than two
hours after the disappearance of the other two, the middle sun disappeared as well—
Schedel]. And a few days later, in the same month, three moons [were seen], and in the
moon that stood in the middle, a white cross. Whereupon the Doctors and the most skillful
searchers of natural things, being sent for from the universities of Paris, Bononia
[Bologna] and Venice, did interpret the prognostication, signifying that there should arise
a discord between the Cardinals in choosing the Pope [...]
287

"There were seen many signs in the sky towards the North, as it were fiery torches and the
likeness of reddish human blood. Neither did these wonders deceive them, for King
Suenus [Sven III of Denmark] spoiled the country of the Wagians and all places were
spoiled by war."
Source: Hartmann Schedel, Liber Chronicarum (Nuremberg, 1493), fol. 203v;
Lycosthenes, op. cit., 413-414.

1173, Northern Ireland: A mass of fire in the air
On the night the bishop of all Northern Ireland died, "the night was illumined from
nocturns until cockcrow, and the ground was all in flames; and a large mass of fire
ascended over the town, and proceeded towards the southeast; and all persons arose from
their beds, imagining that it was day."
Again, a classic description of auroral displays.
Source: Annals of Loch Ce (Millwood, NY: Kraus Reprint, 1965), 149.

1290, England
The disk that flew over Byland Abbey

In 1254, "the perfect form and likeness of a mighty great ship," was said to have been
seen in the sky by "certain monks of St. Albans," in England. In the classic flying saucer
book Flying Saucers Have Landed, Desmond Leslie and George Adamski published the
translation of a document called the "Ampleforth Abbey manuscript," allegedly a 13th
century document. They had come across the story in a letter to The Times on February
9th 1953 that ran as follows:
"Sir - Reports of "flying saucers" usually evoke a small crop of cynical replies that
far more sensational objects were seen towards the end of the last century, &c. While
going through some early manuscripts pertaining to Byland Abbey, in Yorkshire, I came
across material for this sort of criticism which is surely unsurpassed. A document dated
circa 1290 mentions a round flat silver object like a discus which flew over the monastery
exciting "maximum terrorem" among the brethren.
I am, Sir, yours faithfully, A. X. Chumley, Ampleforth College, York"
The controversial fragment itself was in Latin and read as follows:
".. .took the sheep from Wilfred and roast them in the feast of SS. Simon and Jude.
But when Henry the Abbot was about to say grace, John, one of the brethren, came in and
said there was a great portent outside. Then they all went out and LO! a large round silv$
thing like a disk flew slowly over them, and excited the greatest terror. Whereat Henry the
Abbott immediately cried that Wilfred was an adulterer..."
The story came apart when two boys confessed to having written the passage as a
joke. In January 2002 one of us (C.A.) contacted the archivist at Ampleforth Abbey, who
prefers not to be named, in order to discover the identities and motives of the hoaxers. He
replied that he had been at school with them himself. One of the boys had been killed in
an accident in the mid-1950s, he said, while "the other half is a distinguished academic,
now in retirement," who preferred to remain anonymous.

8

"It was done on purpose in order to bring out the folly of the credulous," he added. As
for the name "Chumley," which had been attached to the letter in The Times, it "was a
known local name, spelt more usually as Cholmondly."
When asked if he knew how the surviving hoaxer felt about the fuss made by the
prank - a prank that was (and still is) cited by ufologists the world over, the archivist
replied: "I think he finds it rather tiresome. Consider to what extent you wish to dwell-or
rather be pursued about- the japes of your youth!"

January 1319, Mozhcharyk, Russia
Fiery columns, pillars of fire
At the time when Prince Mikhail of Tver was murdered by his brother and a wicked Tatar,
"many believers and even infidels at that time saw two clouds which came over the body
of blessed Prince Mikhail, and they came together and parted and they shone as the sun.
These people told us of it with tears, and giving many oaths. The body was sent to
Mozhcharyk.
"At that time there were Russian merchants present who wanted to place the body in
a church and cover it with a saintly cover; but they were not permitted to do so and the
body was put in a barn, under guard. Then others living there saw at night a fiery column
extending from the earth to the sky. Others saw a rainbow which bent over the barn in
which the body lay.
"From thence the body was taken to the town of Bezdezh, and when they drew near
the town, many people in the town saw a vision; around the sledge there was a multitude
of people with candles and others on horseback with lanterns, riding in the air. And so
they brought the body to the town, but the body was not placed in the church, but only ifl
the yard. Two of the guards lay down in the sledge above the body but they were seized
89

by great fear and were thrown out of the sledge and pushed afar off. When they arose and
recovered, they went and confessed what had happened to the priests who were there. I
heard it from them and I have written it exactly."
Another source reports that during the course of January, at night over most areas of
Russia numerous witnesses observed "fiery pillars," similar to those sighted in 1111,
which extended from the ground toward the sky. Some people also sighted a "heavenly
arc." Yet others saw horse-like flying entities, equipped with "lanterns."
These descriptions suggest a widespread natural phenomenon such as an aurora
borealis, which could be seen over large portions of Russia. The mechanism of the
iL
aurora's fantastic luminous displays was a mystery until the 20 century, when physicists
understood the behavior of charged particles from the Sun caught in the Earth's magnetic
field. These particles emit light of vivid colors in wide, undulating curtain-like swatchs
that can be likened to pillars, rainbows or arches.
Source: The Nikonian Chronicle, trans. S. A. Zenkovsky, vol. 3 (Princeton, NJ: Kingston
Press, 1984-1989), 110-112

6 November 1331, Florence, Italy: Miraculous cross
An old chronicler records the following observation:

"That evenig a miraculous sign appeared in the sky: a vermilion cross over the
palace of the Priors. Each bar was more than a palm and a half wide; one line appeared
to be more than forty feet high, and the transverse was a little iess. The cross remained for

as long as it takes a horse to run two laps. The people who saw this - and I saw it clearly
- could understand that God was firmly set against our tormented city."
Here we have a clear example of a religious interpretation given to a natural
phenomenon that puzzled observers of the time.

Source: Dino Compagni, Chronicle of Florence, trans. Daniel E. Bornstein (Philadelphia:
Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, 1986), 47-48.

1503, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany: Flying spear
A painting illustrates an observation of a flying spear in the sky, watched by a monk in
prayer. The Latin manuscript calls the object is "the Lance of Christ." The description of
flying spears is a common reference to meteors and bolides in the atmosphere.

Fig. 52: Freiburg meteor
The manuscript was never printed.

Source: Jakob Mennel, Uber Wunderzeichen (De Signis Portentis Prodigiis) (1503).
Current location: Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, Vienna.

20 April 1535, Stockholm, Sweden: Five fiery disks

Five sun-like disks were seen in the sky. Swedish reformer and scholar Olaus Petri
(1493-1552) had a painting made by Urban to memorialize the event. The object's
trajectories were drawn up by Dutch painter Jacob Matham. The Rijksmuseum in
Amsterdam has a copper plate showing Matham at work on this drawing. Controversy
about the event lasted for a century. The painting can be seen now in Stockholm
Cathedral.
Our research indicates that the "controversy" in question didn't have to do with the
sighting or its depiction but with its interpretation by the common people, who took it as a
bad omen after the king converted to Protestantism. Perceiving the painting as a threat to
his power, the king had Petri arrested.
The painting itself is beautiful. It clearly shows solar parhelia due to atmospheric
effects.
Source: Christiane Piens, Les Ovni du Passe (Belgium: Marabout, 1977).

25 October 1593, Manila, Philippines Involuntary desertion
According to Father Gaspar de San Agustin, on the morning of Monday, October 25th
1593, a Spanish soldier suddenly appeared in the Main Square in Mexico City. He
belonged to a regimental unit stationed in Manila in the Philippines, some 9,000 miles
away. The soldier, whose name is not stated, was not merely lost: he was unable to
explain how he had reached the other side of the Pacific Ocean! Following his arrest he
was ordered by the Inquisition to return to Manila.

This story has been published in a number of versions since Father Gaspar de Agustin
included it in his 1698 book Conquista de las Islas Filipinas. Here is the original
paragraph, in English:

"It is worthy of reflection that on the same day that the tragedy of Gomez Perez
occurred, the art of Satan had already made it knowledge in Mexico. With [Satan's help]
some women inclined to performing such acts transported a soldier, who was in the sentry
box on the walls of Manila, to the main square in Mexico City. This was carried out
without the soldier's even being aware of it, and in the morning he was found walking
about the square in Mexico with his weapons, asking everyone who passed by to give him
their name. But the Holy Inquisition of the city ordered him to return to these Islands,
where many who knew him assured me of the truth of this event. "
291

Many details were added later. It is often claimed, for example, that to prove that he
had actually been in Manila the night before, the soldier told Mexican authorities that His
Excellency the Governor of the Philippines, Gomez Perez Dasmarinas, had just been
assassinated with a blow to the head. In this version two months pass before a galleon
arrives in Acapulco bringing an important message from Manila: Governor Dasmarinas
has indeed been murdered by the Chinese during a military mission against the Molucas
Islands. The date of the assassination is given as October 24th. However, no such incident
is described in Father Gaspar's book.
The name of the soldier is sometimes said to be Gil Perez and we are told he has been
charged with desertion. These claims are also later accretions. The origin of the story is
not known, and there are legitimate doubts about its authenticity. Father Gaspar cites
Antonio de Morga's Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas as his source but the story does not
appear there, so we are left wondering whether the priest invented it himself. The legend
is mentioned by UFO writers (such as Morris Jessup) to support theories of abduction or
teleportation.

Mid-17th century, France: A controversial "jeton," a flying disk?
The token shown below, which experts believe was struck around 1656, shows a disk with
light or a beam emanating from it. This object ("jeton" in French) has been mentioned in
numerous books and magazine articles as a commemoration of an event in which a flying
object was observed in the clouds, passing over a wide landscape.
The object is the size of a U.S. quarter or a one-euro coin and similar to thousands of
other tokens that were produced in Europe around that time for religious and educational
purposes. Rather than a flying saucer, it is likely to represent the "Shield of Numa." In fact
jetons bearing very similar images have been found dating to mid-17 century France.
th

Fig. 53: French jeton

It is said that on March 1st, 707 BC, during the outbreak of a plague, the second king o f
Rome, Numa Pompilius, witnessed the fall of an oval shield from the sky during a
ceremony.
Somewhat astonished, he sought advice from the nymph Egeria and the nine Muses,
who assured him that Jupiter had dropped it as a sign of his benevolence. The pestilence
soon came to an end, so the grateful king had eleven identical copies made by an
armourer, and those were used in dances and celebrations every year.
Around 60 AD the Roman poet Lucanus composed a long work in which he proposed
an explanation for the event, suggesting that a stormy wind had whisked the shield out of
a soldier's hand and sent it spinning across the sky. The story was long remembered in the
literature and is likely depicted on this token, where the inscription reads: Oportunus
Adest, "it arrives in time." The same "flying disk" design appears on many jetons from
different periods.
292

November 1661, Chaldan Monastery, Tibet Flying double hat
This case was mentioned by researcher W. Raymond Drake in 1975, based on the diary of
a Jesuit father, Albert d'Orville:

D'Orville, a Belgian, wrote about a fascinating sighting at Lhasa, Tibet: "1661
November. My attention was attracted by something moving about in the heavens. I
thought it was some unknown species of bird which lived in that country, when the thing
on approaching took an aspect of a double Chinese-hat (the classical conical straw-hats)
and flew rotating silently as if borne on invisible wings of the wind. It was surely a
prodigy, an enchantment. That thing passed above the city, and as if it wished to be

admiredit completed two circles, then surrounded by mist it vanished, and no matter how
one strained its eyes it could no longer be seen.
"I asked myself whether the altitude where I was had not played some trick, however
perceiving a lama not far away I asked whether he had seen it. After assenting by nodding
his head, he said to me, 'My Son, what you have seen is not magic. Beings from other
worlds have for centuries sailed the seas of space, they brought intellectual illumination to
the first people populating Earth, they banished all violence and taught men to love one
another, but these teachings are like seed scattered on stone, which does not germinate.
These Beings, all light, are well received by us and often descend near our monasteries
teaching us and revealing things lost for centuries during the cataclysms which have
changed the aspect of the world.'"
293

This would be a most interesting event if it had happened. Unfortunately the diary of
Albert d'Orville does not seem to exist. We have come to the conclusion that the case is
likely to be a hoax, first mentioned by a man named Alberto Fenoglio in a 1966 magazine
entitled Non e Magia. It is quoted as authentic by several contemporary ufological writers
and is widely reproduced all over Internet sites.

1663, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
The language of Heaven
This case is based on a relation of what occurred in the Mission of the Fathers of the
Society of Jesus in the country of New France, from the summer of 1662 to the summer of
1663:

Heaven and Earth have spoken to us many times during the past year, and that in a
language both kind and mysterious, which threw us at the same time into fear and

admiration. The Heavens began with Phenomena of great beauty, and the Earth followed
with violent upheavals, which made it very evident to us that these mute and brilliant
aerial voices were not, after all, mere empty words, since they presaged convulsions that
were to make us shudder while making the Earth tremble.
As early as last autumn we saw fiery Serpents, intertwined in the form of the
Caduceus, flying through mid-air, borne on wings of flame. Over Quebec we beheld a
great Ball of fire, which illumined the night almost with the splendor of day—had not our
pleasure in beholding it been mingled with fear, caused by its emission of sparks in all
directions. This same Meteor appeared over Montreal, but seemed to issue from the
Moon 5 bosom, with a noise like that of Cannon or Thunder; and, after traveling three
leagues in the air, it finally vanished behind the great mountain whose name that Island
bears.
But what seemed to us most extraordinary was the appearance of three Suns. Toward
eight o 'clock in the morning, on a beautiful day last Winter, a light and almost
imperceptible mist arose from our great river, and, when struck by the Sun's first rays,
became transparent,—retaining, however, sufficient substance to bear the two Images cast
upon it by that Luminary. These three Suns were almost in a straight line, apparently
several 'toises' distant from one another, the real one in the middle, and the others, one
on each side. All three were crowned by a Rainbow, the colors of which were not
definitely fixed; it now appeared iris-hued, and now of a luminous white, as if an
exceedingly strong light had been at a short distance underneath.
This spectacle was of almost two hours' duration upon its first appearance, on the
seventh of January, 1663; while upon its second, on the 14 th of the same month, it did not
last so long, but only until, the Rainbow hues gradually fading away, the two Suns at the
sides also vanished, leaving the central one, as it were, victorious.
294

These are classic descriptions of what we recognize today as natural atmospheric
phenomena.

Source: The Jesuit relations and allied documents: travels and explorations of the Jesuit

missionaries in New France, 1610-1791: the original French, Latin, and Italian texts, with
English translations and notes. Reuben Gold Thwaites, 1853-1913. (Cleveland: Burrows,
1899.)

19 January 1665, Quebec, Canada
Fireballs, preceded by explosions
"About a quarter to six in the evening, there was heard to come from beneath the ground a
report so loud as to be taken for a cannon-shot. This sound was heard by persons distant
three and four leagues from one another; while our Savages, knowing that the cannon is
not fired toward evening, except to give warning of the appearance of the Iroquois, left the
woods where they were, and came all through the night to ask us why we had fired such a
terrible cannon shot.
"About seven minutes after this report, there appeared over Quebec a ball of fire
which merely passed by, coming from the mountains toward the North and emitting so
bright a light that houses two leagues from Quebec was seen in broad day. In the course of
the year there were seen several other similar fireballs, not only at Quebec, but below
Tadoussac, and on the way to Three Rivers."

Source: The Jesuit relations and allied documents: travels and explorations of the Jesuit

missionaries in New France, 1610-1791: the original French, Latin, and Italian texts, with

English translations and notes. Reuben Gold Thwaites, 1853-1913. (Cleveland: Burrows,
1899.)

31 March 1676, Florence, Tuscany, Italy: Fiery globe
An Italian magazine called Alata Quaderni (No. 1, Feb 1979), mentions an ancient sourer
which says "there appeared in the Tuscan sky a luminous thing in the shape of a disc or
bag of grain or sheaf." However, an authentic document describes it as a globe.

Fig. 54: Phenomenon in Tuscany
The object was undoubtedly a meteor, seen over much of Italy. It is mentioned by
Father Louis Cotte in his Traite de Meteorologie (Paris, 1784, p. 83) as "a luminous globe
that crossed the Adriatic Sea," and was seen all the way from Livorno to Corsica.

Source of the illustration: Notizie Diverse di Firenze—anno 1676, 406-407, found by a
researcher in the Magonia Internet group. The original belongs to the Marquis Alessandro
Loteringhi della Stufa, Calcione castle in Arezzo (Italy).

1685, Hatfield, Yorkshire, England: Fearful unknowns
Objects turning in the sky, frightening men and cattle. One destroyed some trees, fell into
a river.
This phenomenon, like the following in Rutland, may relate to a weather anomaly,
such as a mini-tornado, but its duration and behavior do place it within the literature of
unusual aerial phenomena.
Source: Philosophical Transactions 2S\ (1702): 1248, and 284 (1702): 1331.

24 March 1718, Island of Lethy, India Globe of fire with residue
A globe of fire appeared to drop a load of gelatinous substance. The strange object came
out of the sky and touched the ground on Lethy Island in the East Indies. Witnesses who
approached the site found a "jelly-like mass, silvery and scaly."
Until the nature of "shooting stars" was understood in the 19th century, people
thought that any blobs of jelly-like material found in their fields were related to meteors.

Source: A Catalogue of Meteorites and Fireballs, from A.D. 2 to A.D. 1860, compiled by
R. P. Greg, Esq., F. G. S, for the British Association for the Advancement of Science in
1860.

19 October 1726, Ath and Liege, Belgium Circles of light
Large glowing clouds collide: fireballs and circles of light: "About 7:30 at night that
Saturday, large clouds of fire arose from our horizon, pushed by the southern wind
towards the north. They seemed to collide in an extraordinary manner, yet soundlessly.
The sky, although calm, was all afire. Among these volumes of fire one could notice large
luminous circles, open at the bottom, pushing one another like the waters of an agitated
sea. About 11 o'clock these phenomena passed over the city, continuing long into the
night, creating panic and wonder everywhere."
This case and the next one are part of a local "wave" of terrifying observations
probably caused by a spectacular auroral display over Northern Europe.
296

Source: Gilles Joseph de Boussu, L'histoire de la ville de Ath (Mons, 1750).

19 October 1726, Echilleuses, France
"Pyramids" in the sky and unexplained rays of color

Pyramids in formation in the sky, with red and blue rays, seen in Echilleuses and at
Villefranche du Rouergue.
The incident was recorded by a witness as follows: "About 8 hours of the evening an
extraordinary sign in the stars; it looked like sorts of pyramids that made spears sometimes
red, sometimes blue in color, and seemed to move in ranks like an army in the air." The
spectacle, probably caused by the same aurora noted above, seemed so horrible that
parishes in the region rang their bells. It lasted until 11 P.M.
Source: Departmental archives of Loiret, courtesy of Merrs. Franck Marie and PierreValery Archassal.

1743, Holyhead near Peibio, Anglesey, Wales
Ships in the sky
Mr. Morris, an experienced mining engineer, master of many languages and eminent
antiquarian, had a report from Anglesey. This was made by a farmer named William John
Lewis whose steading lay near Peibio, a little place only a stone's throw from Holyhead.
"Plowing" (as it was written) "with his servant boy in ye fields", he saw bearing
down upon him a ship of 90 tons, rigged like a ketch, with its fore-tack at the cat-head and
its pennant and antient flying. The day was described as indifferent and cloudy, but the
detail of the ship could be clearly seen. It was "coming from ye mountains of Snowdon",
not by sailing on the waves around Holy Island, but moving "about a Quarter of a mile
High from ye Ground".

The farmer called his wife. She ran from the farmhouse in time to see the ship in the
sky retreating, its pennant lowered to the deck and all sails furled. It was steering stern
foremost, making for whence it had come, the mountains of Snowdonia.
Mr. Morris hastened to Holyhead and interviewed first the wife and then the husband,
separately. Neither had any doubt about the circumstances. The wife had not acquaintance
with sea terms, but was quite sure of what she had seen; her only doubt was what the
neighbours might think if she allowed Mr. Morris to publish the affair. He found the
husband at an inn, visiting Holyhead on farm business. He had no doubt that the man was
sober and sincere, with no trace of the "melancolick" disposition that might have led him
to exaggerate or imagine.
The ship had been plain to see, exact in every detail; the keel could be observed from
below; the sails were distended with the wind; when the foresail was lowered it hung in a
natural way over bow. In the end a cloud hid the vessel from sight, but not before the
farmer, his wife, and his boy had had their observation supported by a flock of birds that
assembled to examine the phenomenon and flew round it from all directions. When the
vessel began its backward journey, the birds with one accord flew from it northwards in
the opposite direction.
What finally persuaded Mr. Morris was the way in which the farmer - William John
Lewis - assured him that he had seen another such ship exactly ten years earlier in much
the same place, and that, ten years before then again, he had seen just such another. The
ships were in each case very like the old packet-boats that plied between Holyhead and
Ireland; the very ropes of the rigging could be counted one by one.
He concluded: "Since the hill at Holyhead is the only height in Anglesey to face the
distant loftiness of Snowdon, some trick of refraction may have been responsible for
picking up vessels plying the Menai Straits and setting them, pennant and antient and all,
to steer the skies above Peibio."
297

Source: Wynford Vaughan-Thomas and Alun Llewellyn, The Shell Guide to Wales
(Michael Joseph Ltd, 1969). The account is found under 'Holyhead' in the Gazetteer
section of the book.

31 August 1743, Castel Nuovo, Italy A light follows Casanova
Casanova saw a "pyramid-shaped flame" 50 cm high, 1.2 m above ground, 3 meters away.
It followed him all day:
"An hour after I had left Castel Nuovo, the atmosphere being calm and the sky clear, I
perceived on my right, and within ten paces of me, a pyramidal flame about two feet long
and four or five feet above the ground. This apparition surprised me, because it seemed to
accompany me. Anxious to examine it, I endeavoured to get nearer to it, but the more I
advanced towards if, the further it went from me. It would stop when I stood still, and
when the road along which I was travelling happened to be lined with trees, I no longer
saw it, but it was sure to reappear as soon as I reached a portion of the road without trees. I
several times retraced my steps purposely, but, every time I did so, the flame disappeared,
and would not shew itself again until I proceeded towards Rome. This extraordinary
beacon left me when daylight chased darkness from the sky."
Casanova's reaction is interesting. First he dismisses the event as a skeptical scientist:
"What a splendid field for ignorant superstition, if there had been any witnesses to that
phenomenon, and if I had chanced to make a great name in Rome! History is full of such
trifles, and the world is full of people who attach great importance to them in spite of the
so-called light of science." But then he adds, more humbly:
"I must candidly confess that, although somewhat versed in physics, the sight of that
small meteor gave me singular ideas." And he concludes with the same words as so many
298

witnesses of unusual phenomena: "I was prudent enough not to mention the circumstances
to anyone."

Fig. 55: Giacomo Casanova
Source: Giacomo Casanova, The Memoirs of Jacques Casanova de Seingalt, trans. Arthur
Machen (New York: Putnam's, 1959), Vol. I, 222.

15 September 1749, Rutland, England Watering intruder
An object created a sprout that roared, took water from a river, shot light beams to the
ground, and broke rocks. Although this case sounds similar to that of Hartfield in
Yorkshire, the two locations are separated by a fair distance.
The weather was calm, warm and cloudy with some showers. The witnesses
described "great smoke with the likeness of fire" either as a single flash or as multiple

arrows darting down to the ground, whose "whirling, breaks, roar and smoke frightened
both Man and Beast."
The phenomenon went down the hill, took up water from the river Welland, and ran
over fields and trees, tearing branches. The Royal Society correspondent reports: "I saw it
pass from Pilton over Lyndon lordship, like a black smoky Cloud with bright Breaks; an
odd whitling Motion, and a roaring Noise, like a distant Wind, or a great Flock of Sheep
galloping along on hard Ground..."
Source: "An Account of an extraordinary Meteor, which resembled a Water-Spout,
communicated to the President, by Tho. Barker, esq." Read on Dec. 14, 1749.
Philosophical Transactions (Nov-Dec. 1749), no. 493.

September 1768, near Leipzig, Germany
Goethe's unknown lights
On the way to the University at Leipzig, 16-year old Goethe and two companions see a
bright "tube" at ground level with blinding small lights jumping around. The trip was
difficult, under steady rain. The travelers had to get out of the carriage to help the horses
in steep slopes. During one of these walking sections, Goethe noticed something unusual:

Fig. 56: Goethe
"Suddenly, in a ravine on the right side of the road, I beheld a sort of amphitheater,
marvellously illuminated. Within a space shaped like a pipe an incalculable number of
small lights were shining, stacked like steps one on top of the other. They were so bright
that the eye was blinded. But what was the most troubling in this sight was that the lights
were not fixed, they jumped this way and that, going up and down and in all directions.
Most of them, however, remained stable and radiated."
"It is with the greatest reluctance that I consented, when I was called, to move away
from this spectacle that I would have desired to examine closer. The postilion, when I
interrogated him, stated that he had never known of such a phenomenon, but in the
neighborhood there was an old quarry, the hole of which was filled with water. It remains
to be known whether it was a pandemonium of elementals or an assembly of luminous
creatures, I would be unable to decide."
While the great writer and philosopher is more likely to have observed a display of
spontaneously burning methane (marsh gas) than the dance of the Fairies, his observation
is interesting.

Source: Goethe's autobiography, 6th book. As published in The Autobiography of Goethe.
Truth and Poetry: from my own life. Translated by J. Oxenford. Vol. 1 (London, 1867),
203.

18 August 1783, Greenwich, England
Ten Balls of Light
"At 11 minutes after nine in the evening, a very singular phenomenon was seen at
Greenwich. It being rather dark, of a sudden an uncommon light appeared, without any
cause visible, for full two minutes; this phenomenon, coming from the N.N.W. perfectly
horizontal in its course, and without any vibration, continued to the S.S.E. It passed over
Greenwich, and near the Royal Observatory, till the elevated trees in the park took it from

the sight. Though it was transitory, the motion was not rapid, for you could distinctly
discover its form, colour, &c. Its duration was near two minutes, during which there was

no variation in its lustre. Its magnitude and animated effect, made it appear near our earth.
Two bright balls parallel to each other, led the way, the apparent diameter of which
appeared to be about two feet, and were followed by an expulsion of eight others, not
elliptical, seeming gradually to mutilate, for the last was small.

Fig. 57: The Greenwich train of meteors
"Between each ball, a luminous serrated body extended, and at the last a blaze issued,
and terminated in a point. Minute particles dilated from the whole. While this luminary
was passing, the atmosphere was exceedingly bright; but immediately after it became
dark, though the moon was up.
"The balls were partially bright, as imagination can suggest; the intermediate spaces,
not so exquisite in their colourings. The balls were tinted first by a pure bright light, then
followed a tender yellow, mixed with azure, red, green, &c. which, with a coalition of
bolder tints, and a reflection from the other balls, gave the most beautiful rotundity and
variation of colours, that the human eye could be charmed with.
"The sudden illumination of the atmosphere, the form, and singular transition of this
bright luminary, rendered much to make it awful; nevertheless the amazing vivid
appearance of the different balls, and other rich, connective parts, not very easy to
delineate, gave an effect equal to the rainbow, in the full zenith of its glory. It appeared
also almost all over the island of Great Britain nearly at the same time, as well as in
France, Flanders, &c."
Although this event is often cited in UFO compilations, this was undoubtedly a
meteor, first seen over the Shetland isles with the apparent size of 1/3 the moon, equal to

twice the full moon over Kent. It seemed to burst into two over Lincolnshire. When it
passed over Windsor it was about 60 miles up, traveling 20 miles a second. It was heard to
explode over York some minutes later. The phenomenon was observed from as far away
as Ireland and Burgundy.
Source: "Singular Phenomenon," The Annual Register (Aug. 18, 1783): 214.

17 July 1790, Alengon, France
Crashed UFO, the pilot escapes!
This is another account in the long series of "crashed UFO with occupant" stories. At 5:00
in the morning, several farmers saw a huge globe in the sky, surrounded by flames. They
first took it to be a balloon that had caught fire, but its speed and the strange whistling
sound coming from it led them to think otherwise. The globe descended slowly, touching
the top of a hill, where it tore up the plants along the slope. The flames from the object set
fire to the small trees and the grass. Fortunately, the locals managed to stop the fire from
spreading.
In his report on the incident, police inspector Liabeuf wrote that the sphere was still
hot in the evening. It showed no signs of damage despite the heat. "It stirred up so much
curiosity that people came from all directions to see it."
After some time, a much unexpected thing happened. A door burst open in the sphere
and a human came out! "This person was dressed in a very strange fashion. He wore a suit
which clung to his body, and when he saw all this crowd he said a few words which could
not be understood, and ran to take flight in the woods."

The peasants drew back from the sphere instinctively - which was fortunate for them,
because the object exploded, throwing pieces everywhere. A search was undertaken to
find the mysterious visitor but he was never discovered.
The Alengon incident has been included in many anthologies of UFO reports, dozens of
books, and has become one of the best-known "folkloric" cases in the field. The reader
may feel a little disappointed, therefore, though perhaps not very surprised, to discover
that the event never really occurred.
The earliest reference to this case comes from an article published by Italian author
Alberto Fenoglio, whom we've already met in connection with the supposed ufological
deeds of Alexander the Great. A writer known to have invented some UFO reports in his
time, Fenoglio seems to have created the story about Inspector Liabeuf for a purportedly
serious article about sightings in ancient history, published in the Italian magazine
Clypeus. This article was widely distributed and translated into several languages. The
truth of the matter finally came to light in 1975 when Italian researcher Edoardo Russo
conducted an investigation into Fenoglio's claims. In spite of this, books and magazine
articles presenting the story of the Alengon 'crash' as a genuine case continue to be
published in good faith every year in many countries.
Three or four historical cases may have inspired Fenoglio to compose a story dated
June 17 , 1790. For instance, on July 24th, 1790, an incident occurred in the municipality
of La Grange de Juillac, France, involving several black "stones from heaven" that fell
with a hissing noise before hundreds of witnesses.
On April 26 , 1803, at 1:00 P.M., a fireball was seen over Caen, Pont-Audemer and
near Alengon. Up to 3,000 stones are said to have fallen amid detonations, one of which
weighed 17 lbs. (.Astronomie populaire, Paris, 1840. Tome IV, 225.)
More famously, precisely a year before the date given by Fenoglio, a fireball
witnessed near the city of Worms, in the Rhineland, led to the writing of a controversial
book. The canon of Trier, Worms and Spires cathedrals, Johann Friedrich Hugo von
302

th

th

Dalberg (1760-1812) saw a meteorite from his family's country house and was told by
neighbours that it had crashed nearby.

Dalberg went on to write Uber Meteor-Cultus derAlten, vorziiglich in Bezugauf

Steine, die vom Himmel gefallen (On the Meteor Cult of the Ancients, Especially with
Regard to Stones Fallen from the Sky), published in 1811, a book suggesting that
meteorites originated in space, where they defied gravity and waited for an opportunity to
drop. "These Air-stones have from the start an inner, electrical life," he wrote, "and can
consequently stay floating, so long as they are surrounded by the neutral-electric ether...
As blazing spheres, sometimes exploding in the upper air, sometimes on their descent,
they plunge down towards the heavenly body into whose spherical electrical atmosphere
they are drawn." Did Fenoglio envision one of these plunging down at Alengon?

March 1796: Don region, Russia
The Devil and the brawling Cossack
According to writer Peter Kolosimo, the inhabitants of a Russian village in the Don region
were surprised to find a large metal ball in one of their fields. The ball measured ten feet
in diameter. People from everywhere flocked to see it, wondering where it had come from.
Clearly it had not been delivered by road, as there were no wheel tracks to be seen
anywhere in the vicinity. It could only have fallen from the sky, they thought. Except for a
regular pattern of circles etched into its surface, the ball was as smooth as marble.
The village folk tried to move it but their effort was useless: it would not budge an
inch. Then a man named Pushkin arrived. Pushkin was a drunkard and a gambler, even a
heretic, and everyone looked down on his ways. But despite his faults, he was also known
to be very courageous. They led him to the spot: "He drew his saber, spurred his horse

toward it, he cursed it and defied it," the legend says. "Whether it came from heaven or
hell he challenged it to fight back."
The man struck the object with his sword again and again. Suddenly the crowd
around him began to howl with terror: one of the circles on the ball had opened up,
revealing a single inhuman eye!
Pushkin sneered and carried on with his blows against the object. He struck it so hard,
in fact, that the blade of his saber snapped off.
The peasants fled in fear. When they looked behind them they saw the drunkard and
his steed were suddenly becoming transparent, fading into the air like ghosts. They could
still faintly hear Pushkin's voice, cussing angrily, but even this quickly faded away. "The
villagers were not unduly perturbed by this," it is said. "The devil had gotten his own back
with the brawling Cossack."
Two days passed: nothing was seen or heard of Pushkin. Then to everyone's surprise
both he and his trusty horse staggered back into the village as if half asleep. He seemed
calm enough, but he soon flew into a rage and began to howl that he was going to put an
end to the unholy globe and set fire to it and the woods and everything around it.
Hearing this, everybody in the village trailed along after him to watch the spectacle,
but he never could take his revenge on the mysterious metal ball, for "all that was there to
be seen was his sorry mortification. The ball was no longer there."
Unlike the case of the crash at Alengon, we have been unable to prove that this tale is
a modern hoax. However, not one Russian specialist we have approached had ever heard
of the story, and the general consensus is that it originated as a fictional tale.

th

Early 19 century, Penrhynisaf, North Wales
Three hours' missing time

The Rev. R. Jones's mother, when a young unmarried woman, is said to have started one
evening towards her home, accompanied by a servant man, David Williams, called on
account of his great strength and stature, Dafydd Fawr, Big David, who was carrying a
flitch of bacon. The night was dark, but calm. Williams walked in the rear of his young
mistress, and she, thinking he was following, went straight home. But three hours passed
before David appeared.
Interrogated as to the cause of his delay, he said he had only been about three minutes
behind her. Told that she had arrived three hours ahead, David would not believe it. At
length, he was convinced that he was wrong in his timing, and he proceeded to account for
his lagging behind:
He had observed, he said, a brilliant meteor passing through the air, followed by a
ring or hoop of fire, and within this hoop stood a man and woman of small size,
handsomely dressed. With one arm they embraced each other, and with the other they took
hold of the hoop, and their feet rested on the concave surface of the ring. When the hoop
reached the earth they jumped out of it, and proceeded to make a circle on the ground. As
soon as this was done, a large number of men and women appeared, and to the sweetest
music that ear ever heard commenced dancing round and round the circle. The sight was
so entrancing that the man stayed, as he thought, a few minutes to witness the scene. The
ground all around was lit up by a subdued light, and he observed every movement of these
beings.
By and by the meteor which had at first attracted his attention appeared again, and
then the fiery hoop came to view, and when it reached the spot where the dancing was, the
lady and gentleman who had arrived in it jumped into the hoop, and disappeared in the
same manner in which they had reached the place. Immediately after their departure the
Fairies vanished from sight. The man found himself alone in darkness, and he proceeded
homewards.
Unfortunately, we have found no original document to authenticate the circumstances
of the story, or even the year of the event, so it has to remain as an interesting fable.

Source: Elias Owen, Welsh Folk-Lore, A Collection of the Folk-Tales and Legends of

North Wales, (1896 edition). Facsimile reprint by Llanerch Publishers, Felinfach, Wales
1996, 93-4.

305

22 February 1803, Hara-Yadori, near Tokyo, Japan
Female visitor
A saucer-shaped "ship" of iron and glass floated ashore. It was 6 meters wide and carried
a young woman with very white skin. The episode began when a group of fishermen and
villagers saw a 'boat' just off the shore of Hara-yadori in the territory of Ogasawara
etchuu-no-kami. (1)
People approached the object in their own small boats and managed to tow it to the
beach. The object was round. The upper half was composed of glass-fitted windows with
lattice, shielded by a kind of putty, and the lower hemisphere consisted of metal plates.
Through the glass dome the witnesses could see letters written in an unknown language
and a bottle containing a liquid, perhaps water.

Fig. 58: Japanese object and occupant
The villagers arrested the girl and tried to decide what to do with her. One of the villagers,
who had heard of a similar case that had happened at another beach not far from there,
suggested that the woman was possibly a foreign princess, exiled by her father because of
an extramarital love affair. The box, he said, may even contain her lover's head. If this
was so, it would be a political problem, and that would imply some sort of cost: "We may
be ordered to spend a lot of money to investigate this woman and boat. Since there is a
precedent for casting this kind of boat back out to sea, we had better put her inside the
boat and send it away. From a humanitarian viewpoint, this treatment is cruel for her.
However, this treatment would be her destiny." Backing their decision with such
straightforward logic, they forced the visitor back into the domed object, pushed it out,
and it drifted out of sight.
This is not the only version of the story but it is probably the earliest. It comes from
the Japanese Toen-Shosetsu, a compilation of stories written in 1825 by various authors,
including Bakin Takizawa, a Japanese novelist. There was even a reproduction of a sketch
of the object, showing something like a typical round, domed flying saucer.

A second version of the story was published in 1844 in a book called Ume no Chiri,
written by Nagahashi Matajirou. This version said the incident took place on 24 March
1803. The beach was now named Haratono-hama. The girl was 1.5 meters tall and her
dress was strange, made of an unknown material. Her skin was white as snow. She spoke
to the astonished crowd in a language they were at a loss to interpret. She also had a
strange cup of a design unknown to the witnesses.
Was there a precedent for a tale of this kind in Japan? Kazuo Tanaka explains that the
report seems to be based on a variety of Japanese folklore known as Utsuro-fune or
Utsubo-fune, a series of stories handed down over generations that preserved "the ancient
national memory of Japanese immigration." In these tales, a founding member of a family,
usually a noblewoman, would be said to have come across the sea by boat. If the tale was
believable it could raise one's family to a higher social status. In the lyrics of one folkloric
song from Kyushu Island we find references to "a daughter of a nobleman" who was sent
to sea in a boat with glass windows. It even mentions that "the food in the boat was
delicious cake." (2)
Could the whole report, then, have been a fiction based on much older hearsay?
Tanaka draws this conclusion: no official document of the period mentions the incident of
the woman in the round boat, and there are no references to beaches called Haratono-hama
or Hara-yadori, which would be suspicious omissions if the story were true. On the other
hand, the erudite ufologist Junji Numakawa has pointed out that the name of the beach
could easily have changed over time. If the beach was originally named Kyochi-gama, as
he postulates, this could be meaningful, as 'gama' or 'kama' means pot or cauldron, and
the pot-like recipients used at the time were not unlike the craft in which the mysterious
woman arrived. (3)
306

Sources: (1) Kazuo Tanaka Did a Close Encounter of the Third Kind Occur on a Japanese

Beach in 1803? Skeptical Inquirer Volume 24, Number 4 July/August 2000. Masaru Mori,
The Female Alien in a Hollow Vessel, Fortean Times No. 48, Spring 1987, 48-50 and The

UFO Criticism by J. N. from Japan, Vol. 1, No. 1, January 2001. The latter is the English

version of a privately published newsletter (UFO Hihyo) written and distributed by
Tokyo-based researcher Junji Numakawa.
(2) This song was collected by the great Japanese folklorist Yanagida Kunio
(1875-1962) and reproduced in a paper of his titled The Story of Utsubo-fune in 1925.

(3) The UFO Criticism by J. N. from Japan, Vol. 1, No. 1, January 2001.

307

15 December 1813, Connecticut, USA
First Congressional Hearings!
This episode took place during the American war against England. When unexplained
"blue lights" were seen repeatedly over the harbor, they were interpreted as treacherous
signals intended for the British fleet. The lights were "thrown up, like rockets, from Long
Point," and distinctly seen, but never identified. "The gentleman from whom we receive
this information plainly saw the lights, and states, that they were answered by three heavy
guns from the ships of the enemy (England), at intervals of about ten minutes; that he was
further informed, by an officer from Fort Trumbull, that the lights were continued during
the whole night."
Considerable emotion was stirred up in the newspapers and in Congress when a letter
from Commodore Decatur to the Secretary of the Navy, dated 20 Dec. 1813, confirmed
the sightings: "These signals have been REPEATED, and have been seen by twenty
persons at least in this squadron, there are men in New London who have the hardihood to
affect to disbelieve it, and the effrontery to avow their disbelief."

Fig. 59: Commodore Stephen Decatur
A heated debate followed at the House of Representatives:
"Mr. Law, of Conn., after some remarks, in too low a voice to be heard by the
reporter, called the attention of the House to the story about certain blue lights which had
been put in circulation, and had received countenance by the publication of an official
letter from one of our naval officers to the head of a department. The motion Mr. Law was
about to make, was not, he said, induced by any belief that the report was correct; for he
could not believe that his native town contained in its bosom men so abandoned as to light
those torches (...) He could not believe, under these circumstances, that these lights were
exhibited as represented, but that some delusion must have existed on the subject.

It was proper, he conceived, that the fact should be enquired into, and placed on its
proper footing, as it had been alluded to frequently in this House. With this view he
offered the following resolution:

ResolvedThat a committee be appointed to enquire whether any
treasonable correspondence has been held, or information by means of blue
lights or signals by fire given from the shore at or near the harbor of NewLondon in the state of Connecticut, to the blockading squadron off that harbor,
whereby the enemy might learn the state, condition or movements of the
American ships under the command of commodore Decatur now in that port: and
that the committee be authorised to take evidence by deposition or otherwise as
they may deem necessary, and report thereon to this House.

301

Mr. Mosely supported the motion. Mr. Grundy was willing such an enquiry should be
made, if the matter were referred to the naval committee. Mr. Fisk said he was sorry to
hear a wish expressed by the gentleman from Tennessee for the proposed enquiry. When
he looked at the principle of this motion, he trembled at the consequences of its adoption.
What was the principle? It was nothing more than a proposition to exercise, through a
committee of this House, the inquisitorial power to enquiry whether treason has been
committed in a particular instance. He hoped no such precedent would receive the
sanction of the House. Mr. Eppes and Mr. Jackson of Virginia opposed it. Mr. Roberts
moved to lay it on the table. Mr. Calhoun thought it a matter too diminutive to engage the
House."
The unidentified lights were never explained.

Source: Proceedings of Congress, House of Representatives Monday, January 24, 1814.

Also Niles' Weekly Register (Baltimore, MD), Vol. 5:121 (December 25, 1813) and Vol.
6:133 (March 19, 1814).

Early spring 1820, Manchester, New York, USA
Two glorious entities
Joseph Smith, founder of the Mormon religion, writes: "It was on the morning of a
beautiful, clear day.. .1 kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to
God.. .1 saw a pillar of light exactly over my head...
"When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory
defy all description... One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing
to the other This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!'...
"I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was
right, (for at this time it had never entered into my heart that all were wrong) and which I
should join.
"I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong...
"I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice
against me among professors [believers] of religion, and was the cause of great
persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between
fourteen and fifteen years of age...yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to
excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common
among all the sects all united to persecute me."

Source: The Pearl of Great Price, by Joseph Smith - History 1:5-8, 14-19, 22.

21 September 1823, Palmyra, New York, USA
Golden apparition
In this next episode, Joseph Smith was shocked to see a light appear in his room, and a
human figure within the light: "Indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled
with consuming fire. The appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body. In a
moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that by
which I was already surrounded..."
The figure, whose feet did not touch the floor, revealed itself as "angel Moroni" and
gave Smith specific instructions. The scene repeated itself three times during the night.
After the third time Smith was surprised to hear the cock crow and to find that daylight
was approaching, "so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of that night." The
next day Smith found himself so exhausted that he couldn't work in any useful way in his
normal chores. His father thought he was sick and told him to go home. On the way he fell
to the ground when trying to cross a fence, and remained unconscious. The angel appeared
to him once more and told him to reveal his instructions. Smith went on to found the
Mormon religion.
By placing the case in this section on Myths, we do not mean to state that the story
was invented or that no such event took place. Millions of people today do take the report
at face value. Ufologists, on the other hand, might claim that it represents a typical
"bedroom visitation" type of alien contact. We do believe that it is unrelated to the events
we seek to study in our Chronology of unexplained aerial phenomena.

Source: Francis Kirkham, Concerning the Origin of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake,
1937), and Smith's own account in publications of the Church of Latter Day Saints.

Epilogue

310

This section gives only a tiny sample of the hundreds of items we have extracted from the
literature, for which we found evidence of natural explanations or strong indications of a
mischievous or deluded author. A complete listing of such cases is impossible to
contemplate, since it would have to include every comet, every meteor shower, every
atmospheric illusion and every tornado ever mentioned in books or broadsheets down
through the centuries. At the time, many of these phenomena were taken as omens of
disaster or as manifestations of the divine realm, affect to disbelieve it, and the effrontery
to avow their disbelief."
In passing, one must note that in spite of such fanciful interpretations the reliability
and accuracy of the observations was good enough for us, in the 21st century, to
reconstruct the nature of phenomena that are known to today's science, but were a
complete, often terrifying enigma to ancient witnesses.
Most importantly, this compilation of mythical or legendary material demonstrates
the powerful impact of this imagery, not only in folklore (including contemporary
folklore) but in spiritual beliefs and mainstream history. Religious tradition in every part
of the world is replete with allusions to celestial phenomena that inspired chroniclers to
invoke moral principles and warnings to humanity in writing that has survived through the
ages.
This work also shows that the dominant narratives in today's literature on
"extraterrestrial" encounters - complete with saucer crashes, strange writing and
311

abduction by non-human entities - were already present in widely-reported stories that
predate the industrial revolution.

PART III

312

Sources and Methods
Anyone attempting to review the historical and social impact of unexplained aerial
phenomena immediately faces two difficult challenges: (1) where to find reliable
information that can be further investigated and verified? And (2) how to select suitable
material for presentation without biasing the reader towards pre-established conclusions?

A fact-driven study
It is natural to begin with available sources in literature and on the Internet. Until
now, mainstream believers in extraterrestrial visitors have actively discouraged such
research, because it seemed obvious to them that the phenomenon was of recent vintage.
Thus Budd Hopkins, a contemporary authority on alien abductions, has sharply criticized
one such compilation as "an odd confluence of UFO case studies, free-wheeling

speculation, and folklore of obviously uncertain authenticity (our emphasis)."

Indeed, most UFO books begin with the blunt affirmation that the "flying saucer era"
started on 24 June 1947 when Kenneth Arnold spotted several objects apparently flying in
formation over Mount Rainier, Washington, implying that any cases before that date are

irrelevant. Many specialists, such as Jerome Clark, see no indication that the phenomenon
existed before the mid- 19 century.
This attitude is driven by ideology rather than data: If the UFO phenomenon did start
in the summer of 1947 with Arnold and (shortly thereafter) the infamous Roswell crash,
then one is justified to claim that it originates with visitors from space who have spotted
our atomic explosions and decided to come to Earth to investigate - and perhaps save us
from ourselves: A seductive view, but one that is contradicted by the mass of previous
cases. While it is true that the amount of available data went through a sharp rise about
200 years ago, we have seen that this was due more to progress in the publishing and
dissemination of news around the world than to a dramatic increase in the actual
frequency of incidents.
At the other end of the spectrum are the devotees of the Ancient Astronaut theory,
who claim that contact with extraterrestrials was established very early in the history of
the human race, or even, as the Raelian cult argues, that we are the product of E.T.
experimentation or inter-breeding. As we have noted, they find support for their view in
many religious traditions and, indeed, in ancient writing and the Bible itself, which alludes
to sexual intercourse between the Nephilim (gods from Heaven) and the daughters of men.
When we began this project we took a different approach: one that is strictly factdriven, rather than belief-driven. Leaving ideologies aside, we were striving to compile a
list of documented sightings, with as little reference as possible to a particular theory although naturally the beliefs of the witnesses and those around them had to be noted as a
factor in the way the story was transmitted to us.
One of us (JV) had long collected items from the literature and from folklore in an
effort to find out whether the phenomenon of unidentified aerial objects had an
identifiable "start date" in history or followed recognizable patterns in time. Beginning in
the mid-sixties, he compiled and published computer catalogs of reports culled from
books and newspapers around the world.
th

313

In a similar vein, Chris Aubeck began to re-examine the totality of the available
literature, taking advantage of the new search capabilities of the Internet to leverage the
information available in books. As an online collaboration group, the Magoniax Project he
initiated in 2003 with fellow researcher Rod Brock was thus able to track down journals
and obscure sources in several languages to assemble the largest collection of such stories
in the world today.
The two authors began collaborating through web-based software to merge their files
and catalogs of that period. As a result, we were often able to go back to original sources
rather than citing popular trade books or contemporary compilations.

Classical Sources
Contrary to common opinion, we are not dealing here with "folklore of obviously
uncertain authenticity," as abductionist Budd Hopkins once asserted. Early sources are
plentiful, sometimes officially certified and verified, detailed and quite distinguished, even
in the remote classical era. An early researcher, Raymond W. Drake, remarked (in Flying
Saucers No. 39, December, 1964):
"The Romans worshipped the Gods for a thousand years; their augurs prophesied the
future from signs in the skies. Julius Obsequens recorded 63 celestial phenomena, Livy
30, Pliny 26, Dio Cassius 14, Cicero 9, confirming their psychological impact on the
educated Roman mind. Lycosthenes writing in AD 1552 collated 59 heavenly portents in
Roman times."
No less a political and classical authority than Cicero mentions the topic in his writing
(De Re Publica 1.19.31), where a character named Laelius scolds the young Tubero for
his fascination with a celestial phenomenon - a vision of a double Sun in the sky reported to the Roman Senate. Another Roman philosopher, Seneca, on the other hand (in
Questiones Naturales 7.1.1) sides with the young man because man's imagination gets

dulled by the endless repetition of ordinary phenomena. It takes an exceptional sighting, a
"sweet spectacle," to bring back our feeling of wonderment before the beauties of nature,
he argued.
G";crcappc.
irofcDtijemtl?ct|?c Clcmcnt
c anioutensof(oitciv
anagoiGrange
Com-fs.
ki
n
o
t
f
fumg
f
ana
n
g
i
n
*
to My.mettuueeUutt?Oitlo.icrsLungof//•<•';ant)put(juntoflight, ana
tkMgof
ofingijtjjtV'
im mat
i'"p«>,bidtfjerebcfccgeIjimtf»?ir^fcircs.SUtjrii
F.onctu
g
otti
toaB
ocao,
Alunciutyp feme dio tuccccoc i;un ;n t(;c
htugaomc.
Mini*
n n'rf<j
uer init (jfifT)cflfceretafccn,info?jofefcale.6
ttjerorne
oTt
f
j
a
fpcarc
low
a
o
bi
n
cngrauen,
tlje
fame
verc
let
c
i ana IJ ua « >
hwr
u
j
o
f
ttjc
'K^'uhj toent about to tymtt the /<•>»/<*> out ortljc Country
iD.i'om
\janqiu1)cc ana flcU5c,.tr.a i'.lmo£tocfacco tv,? nation ol'tijc
CClw\nbiftinguilljinstvC
Dju fenn a tfifljop
ofamt
tirelc fa(3.lnt Cw^f/^/r I3.iptifcn ore 5 -i
truutic
nam? of F u l l e r thsou^h t h e lonnc the lm!v ChcP (Bafnz.o ie liurTheoJo rc

V.-trc£*te:

frfft.t

1

OJoafcr

r

A n x n

D-.1-1)..,

B a p t i f c t h e e Liarb.i m i l . u

hiHumntptiru
ptr fl'utn in ftirtiM <Ofi!- )t\X JU4tCr batlitljca aU);".^.
(Po:coucr hi tlpfc owes, (bcrea^prarcb in Affrit.. Ccio icucnge* ^
the

in

r

(

ibitUn?hutbpon
aner,falbebt
enpt.)iYi»mti<.
\ual;ioncUfy'
G beoreana
UuljcablIjis
bcaoe
i:i luo.-Ds,
i
j
bnat
ng
out
ccrt
bntoojt'
a
fpfj
c
mous
teaming tf;c tyft? beliefs auotfjctrmitic , t!;crc cair.c fcoaiiulp c f.cric

Fig. 60: A fragment from the English translation of Lycosthenes, whose book
bore the full title " The Doome warning all Men to the Iudgemente wherein are
contayned for the most parte all the Straunge Prodigies hapned in the Worlde,
with diuers Secrete Figures of Reuelations tending to marines stayed conuersion
towardes God: in tnaner of a generall Chronicle, gathered out of sundrie
approued authors by St. Batman professor in diuinite, by Konrad Lykosthenes,
1518-1561." (Imprinted by Ralphe Nubery assigned by Henry Bynneman.
Cum priuilegio Regal, London 1581).
In many historical periods the phenomenon was taken very seriously indeed. It should
be remembered that it was the Roman custom to report every year to the Consuls anything
that could be interpreted as a portent, as the Consuls wanted to be aware of it in making

their decisions. Unfortunately for us, the Annales Maximi that contained these "prodigies"
is lost, but it is supposed that Livy, Pliny and Obsequens had access to these annals and
drew from them.
Among other classical sources was Boece (Boetius or Boethius), ca. 475-525 AD,
Roman philosopher and statesman. There are several editions of Boece's work. An
honored figure in the public life of Rome, where he was consul in 510 AD, he became the
able minister of the Emperor Theodoric. Late in Theodoric's reign false charges of treas^A
were brought against Boethius; after imprisonment in Pavia, he was sentenced without
trial and put to death.

Fig. 61: Boetius
While in prison he wrote his greatest work, De Consolatione Philosophise (The
Consolation of Philosophy). His treatise on ancient music, De musica, was for a thousand
years the unquestioned authority on music in the West. One of the last ancient
Neoplatonists, Boethius translated some of the writings of Aristotle and made
commentaries on them. His works served to transmit Greek philosophy to the early

centuries of the middle Ages. Translations vary widely because of the unusual vocabulary
used in the text. There are both prose and metrical versions and they differ in some details.
Another important source, John the Lydian (John Lydus), 490-ca. 565 AD was a
bureaucrat in the praefecture in Constantinople and an antiquarian scholar. He wrote three
treatises that preserve much information from earlier sources while responding to
contemporary controversies. On Offices ('De magistratibus') is translated as Ioannes

Lydus: On Powers or The Magistracies of the Roman State (Anastasius C. Bandy:

Philadelphia, 1983). On Months and On Portents have not yet been translated into
English.
Another author often quoted in our Chronology is Matthew of Paris (or "Matthew
Paris"). He was an English Benedictine monk whose extensive and detailed chronicles of
events in the 13th century form one of the most significant primary sources in medieval
studies.
Although Paris wrote voluminously, very little of his works shed any light on his own
life. We do know he was a monk at St. Albans and that he occasionally visited the royal
courts. He spent most of his life at St. Albans, but he put his acquaintance with persons of
import and his few trips outside the monastery to good use in acquiring news to include in
his chronicles.

Fig. 62: Matthew Paris
In 1248 he went to Norway to reform the Benedictine Monastery of St. Benet Holm;
on his journey he was entrusted with letters for King Haakon IV, with whom he formed a
friendship. Paris was also personally acquainted with King Henry III of England and
Richard, Earl of Cornwall.
Another influential chronicler is Gregoire de Tours, a sixth-century historian. Born
Clermont-Ferrand in 595, he went to Tours seeking a cure for an illness at the tomb of
Saint Martin, and stayed in that city where he became a bishop. He left many treatises on
history and astronomy, including a hagiography of Saint Julian and Saint Martin; a book
about ecclesiastical cycles, and a tumultuous History of the Franks that earned him the
title of first French historian.

Fig. 63: Gregoire de Tours and Salvius facing King Chilperic.

Notable among later authors we have consulted is John Howie (1735-1793) "chronicler
and biographer, who lived on his ancestral farm of Lochgoin, in Renfrewshire, a noted
place of refuge in Covenanting times. He early developed an interest in the Covenanters
and Reformers, and went on to amass a wealth of material from manuscript and published
sources he used as a basis for series of biographical sketches which he published in 1775
under the title of Biographia Scoticana or Scot Worthies," (according to Scottish Church

Hist. & TheoL, 414).

Screening
The Internet has introduced a revolution in our access to ancient texts. In particular, the
network's ability to link together groups of researchers interested in the same topics and
willing to share their data has allowed us to take a giant step beyond the parsimonious and
often erroneous databases available prior to this work.

Fig. 64: Three suns seen in 1492
Having assembled such a body of information, in itself a never-ending process, the
challenge becomes one of validation and selection. In order to avoid creating the kind of
misleading framework found in the literature, we cannot presuppose anything about the
nature of the data we present. At the same time, we have to be faithful to the beliefs and
statements of the participants: if they thought they were witnessing a divine manifestation
or a contact with a creature from another world, we cannot censor that information, and
indeed it is relevant to the way they color their testimony.
The primary phase of the selection process has to do with the elimination of what we
now recognize as natural phenomena. Reliable knowledge about meteors and comets is of
quite recent introduction: as late as 1803 the French Academy of Sciences didn't believe
that stones could fall from the sky, and the movement of comets still baffles the average
citizen today.
Reports of seemingly miraculous events, such as pillars of light in the sky or triple
moons, are explained today as atmospheric effects but were understandably baffling to
ancient writers. We should be grateful to them for preserving these items, even as they
presented them in a supernatural context. Their contribution has augmented our ability to
compute the orbit of comets by going back to sightings over the centuries. Similarly, the
frequency of meteors, hence the structure and origin of our solar system, is better known
because of such ancient records.
In his book entitled L 'Atmosphere, Camille Flammarion gives numerous examples of
stories based on meteorological observations misinterpreted as supernatural phenomena,
and later correlated with political events. Flammarion cites such a compilation by a friend
of his, Dr. Grellois, concerning "mystical meteorology."
In compiling the data for this book we have tracked down, read and ultimately
rejected far more cases than we have kept. As we saw in Part II, many events listed in the

contemporary literature of unusual aerial phenomena turn out to be meteors, comets,
auroras or tornadoes reframed as "disks" or "craft". When medieval witnesses observed
something burning in the sky they could only assume it was made of wood, hence the
"flaming beam" over a German hillside in one classic illustration. Modern witnesses make
similar assumptions when they jump to the conclusion that unidentified flying objects are
necessarily spaceships from another world. Every century, every culture (including our
own Western scientific culture) has its own myopia and peculiar obsessions.
For our own purposes, whenever we could not find compelling evidence to indicate
the object was NOT a meteor, a comet or an atmospheric effect, we have generally
excluded the case from our Chronology.

Rules for inclusion
Once such natural misidentifications are removed, one is left with a mix of stories that
range from the factual description of puzzling phenomena (perhaps because we are
missing a crucial piece of information) to extraordinary claims that are the stuff of legend?
and are often embedded into religious belief systems. The problem then becomes one of
setting consistent criteria. In the present book we have applied the following set of rules:

Rule 1: Credibility.
Cases that we found, to the best of our estimation, to be fictional or fraudulent were
excluded from the main chronology, but some of them were kept as background reference,
historical milestones or educational material in our section on "Myths, Legends, and the
Chariots of the Gods" (Part II of the book).

Rule 2: Space and time.

Cases must have a specific place and time associated with them in order to be retained in
the Chronology. Statements like "There were numerous reports of lights in the sky in
tenth-century Asia" or "Hopi traditions allude to contact with space beings" are not
helpful. They offer no historical correlation and are almost impossible to research in the
context of our project. Legendary events cannot be assigned a date in a real chronology.
No years can be given for the dynasties of probably fictitious kings. We expect to have at
least a specific region or location and an approximate date.
We relaxed this rule somewhat for ancient cases and gradually tightened it as one got
closer to the present century. We take pride in starting and ending the chronology at real,
reliable dates.

Rule 3: Description of the phenomenon.
Cases must describe a specific phenomenon in sufficient detail so that common
explanations (such as meteors, comets or illusions) can be recognized and excluded. The
phenomenon should be linked to an aerial phenomenon or items closely related to contact
with an aerial object or a non-human entity. Here again, we have relaxed these standards
somewhat as we looked further back in time.

Rule 4: Witness identification.
Cases where witnesses are cited (or, even better, identified by name and function) are
given greater weight than general statements about an event, especially when they make it
possible to verify the existence and credibility of that particular person.

Hoaxes

We have attempted to detect and eliminate hoaxes from our chronology, but we do see
such stories as important social indicators rather than spurious narratives: in order for a
hoax to be credible to those who hear it, it must fit into the general belief system of the
society that surrounds the author of the hoax. If we assume that actual stories of unusual
observations are repressed in a given era (by Church authorities intent on fighting
witchcraft, or by a "rationalist" regime determined to stamp out potentially subversive
ideas) then it makes sense that we would only hear of the phenomena through the indirect
channel of legends, fairy tales, and hoaxes.
The problem of false testimony becomes more complex when the authors of the hoax
belong to a power system, such as a religious group or a political structure. Hoaxes then
become tools for disinformation and for the shaping of society, using the credulity of
common citizens to propagate a certain faith or to maintain existing structures.
Throughout history this device has been used for the convenience of emperors, kings,
and Popes, and it is still being used today in disinformation and psychological warfare.
For this reason we have made a special effort to track down the sources of the stories we
have related, to the extent that the background could be researched.
319

"Explanations"
One of the secret pleasures and rewards of this work has been the study of the various
"explanations" given by scholars of every era to dismiss the observations brought to them
by common people.
The following figure is a case in point: on 7 March 1715, starting in the evening and
lasting until 3 A.M., a strange mist arose over an English village. Inside this mist or cloud,
the witnesses thought they saw the figure of a frightening giant holding a sword. This is

related fully in a pamphlet entitled A Full and True Relation of the Strange and Wonderful
Apparitions, etc., which is kept in the British Museum.

Fortunately for rationalists everywhere, a certain expert named Doctor Flamstead was
able to "explain" this phenomenon (and several following it) in terms of "the darkness of
people's conscience," which "seeks to destroy Church and State."

Fig. 65: "Full and true relation..."
Thus the fantastic celestial apparition, instead of shaking up the existing state of
knowledge, became interpreted - on the contrary - as a solemn reminder that the masses
must stay in line, and always support the ruling class.

As for the man in the cloud, "his heart is full of envy, heart and fury, seeking the
destruction of all love and charity."
In all periods, we are able to observe the stupidity and the arrogance of such selfstyled "rationalist" scholars who seize upon the sense of wonder, terror or hope of their
contemporaries to advance their own preconceived theories, and to reinforce the existing
order.

The special problem of crashed saucers
Since 1947, when North American newspapers reported on dozens of mysterious "flying
saucers" that had fallen into parks, backyards, and streams, there has existed an almost
morbid obsession with dead aliens and wrecked spacecraft. This, too, is a very old story.
During our research, Chris Aubeck has come across numerous legends of artificially
made objects falling from the sky, including swords, shields, books, jewels, and statues,
plus the occasional meteorite bearing hieroglyphic inscriptions. Stories of this kind are
being catalogued for a future study but have not been retained in the present work.
We have also noted that a whole genre of stories about aerial travelers in trouble
emerged in medieval times. Amusing tales were told of ships from the clouds that ran into
technical difficulties over Great Britain, leaving behind such items as anchors. Though
dated only approximately, they have been included for reference.
Until we find evidence to the contrary, we must conclude that tales involving actual
UFO crashes (as we understand the term today) materialized as "factual reports" in mid to
late 19th century newspapers, but the earliest crash report was described in French science
fiction as early as 1775.

The special problem of "dragons"

The accounts most closely resembling UFO crashes within the scope of our chronology
come from Chinese lore and describe the fall of "dragons." For example, we have
mentioned the episode of 1169 AD, when dragons were seen battling in the sky during a
thunderstorm and pearls like carriage wheels fell down on the ground, where they were
found by herds' boys. These pearls would constitute physical proof that a phenomenon
had occurred but unfortunately nothing more is said about them.
A similar situation occurred one night in the late Fourth Century AD when Lu
Kwang, King of Liang, saw a black dragon in the sky: "Its glittering eyes illuminated the
whole vicinity, so that the huge monster was visible till it was enveloped by clouds which
gathered from all sides. The next morning traces of its scales were to be seen over a
distance of five miles, but soon were wiped out by the heavy rains."
One of Kwang's attendants told him that the omen foretold "a man's rise to the
position of a ruler," adding that he would no doubt attain such a rank. Lu Kwang rejoiced
when he heard this, and did actually become a ruler some time afterwards. More than a
century later, in 1295, two dragons fell into a lake at I Hing. This was followed by a
strong wind which raised the level of the water "more than a chang," that is, some 10 feet.
The fourteenth century chronicler of this incident, Cheu Mih, adds that he had personally
seen the results of another 'dragonfall' himself. Seeing the scorched paddy fields of the
Peachgarden of the Ts'ing, he interviewed one of the villagers about it. "Yesterday noon
there was a big dragon that fell from the sky," he was told. "Immediately he was burned
by terrestrial fire and flew away. For what the dragons fear is fire."
This raises the question of exactly what the Chinese of that era understood by the
words we now translate as "dragons," obviously a term that covered a wide variety of
aerial phenomena, rather than our simple contemporary image of a flying, fire-belching
serpent with wings.
In cases when the circumstances surrounding the dragon are clearly stated (storms,
destruction, lightning strikes, objects lifted into the sky) it seems that the terrified
321

witnesses were observing tornadoes, with funnel clouds in the shape of giant serpents
whipping around in the sky and causing widespread disaster.

Entities
Anomalies involving interaction with entities similar to those often associated with aerial
phenomena, pose a special challenge. A shining being stepping outside a ball of light and
addressing the witness is a valid entry in the chronology, but what about the shining beifig
by itself, entering a room or meeting the witness, without any other aerial phenomenon
reported? We excluded most of these cases from our list, keeping only instances where the
interaction had a special relevance to the overall phenomenon.
This decision may be challenged by our readers. In defense, we were concerned that,
the moment we added superhuman beings by themselves and suggested they
communicated with humans (either to give warnings or advice or tools or instructions)
every other case in our chronology would get tinged with a sense of deliberate purpose.
There are anomalies and patterns here, but we should not lead the reader into believing
that certain types of entities are necessarily behind the phenomena.
There is an extraordinary abundance of entity sightings (angels, demons, gods, and
ghosts) in ancient chronicles. To distinguish between fictional and factual accounts now is
impossible, and to use any and all would mean lumping aerial phenomena with cryptozoological creatures willy-nilly. If we take folklore, mysticism, phantoms, fantasy,
dreams, and omens as our source, entity-only sightings would easily outnumber sightings
of aerial phenomena by a hundred to one, so an exhaustive catalogue containing both is
not helpful.
No known criteria helps us sort "ufonauts" from other kinds of creatures (such as a
mermaid, or a sea serpent) when no aerial phenomenon is present. We prefer to inform the
reader that accounts involving supernatural entities were contemporaneous with aerial
phenomena reports throughout history, pointing out that such stories do corroborate some

aspects of the enigma as testified by modern witnesses, but that may imply a relationship
that is beyond the scope of our compilation. Our purpose in this book is to explore an
unknown phenomenon, manifesting throughout history, possibly misinterpreted by every
culture in terms of its own history or religion. We suspect that the data we have compiled
in our Chronology indicates the presence of a previously unknown physical element.

Biblical accounts
Religious texts such as the Bible contain many references to flying objects that are
assumed to represent divine manifestations. For example, Zachariah relates that he saw
such an object: "I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll.
And he said unto me, 'What seest thou?' And I answered, T see a flying roll; the length
thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits'" (approximately 40 feet).
Descriptions of celestial chariots, visions of the Throne of God (Merkhaba), or the
Shekinah generally cannot be related to specifically dated phenomena, and belong in a
general analysis of religious, symbolic or mythical imagery.
Most Biblical references to UFO-like phenomena place them within a complex
narrative in which divine entities intervene to assist a particular group of people for what
can only be described as political and religious reasons. The difference between, say, Jane
Lead's mystical experiences in the 17th century and those of the Bible is that Lead was
shown spectacular things that she later interpreted in bursts of guided inspiration, whereas
"celestial intervention" in the Bible had a dramatic, strategic effect. Biblical accounts
show divine entities intimately working for and alongside whole communities, whereas
Lead's experiences are personal and private, like those of contemporary abductees.
This means that while the physical phenomena described in the Bible resembled
aerial phenomena from other historical periods, their function had a far greater impact,
biased towards an ultimate goal affecting a larger number of people. This makes them
stand apart from other accounts we read, whether we believe in the scriptures or not.
323

Given this background, the placement of the few biblical stories we quoted raised
some important issues. The two authors have had many discussions and occasionally
heated debates on this point. A case could be made to leave Ezekiel in the main
chronology but to exclude other Biblical events. Accounts of pillars of fire and light, on
the other hand, are suitable for the chronology because they don't imply any effort on the
part of the phenomena themselves to become intimate with the witnesses, any more than
the North Star to a traveler.
We dislike the idea of portraying aerial phenomena as having selectively aided one
religious order or community above others. This has led the authors to debate what
message the sightings conveyed to our readers: Is it wise, we asked ourselves, to transmit
this message with its religious context when we wanted the book to be useful to a world of
researchers working in different cultures? Yet the fact that certain communities, such as
the Hebrews, the ancient Chinese or the followers of Clovis have interpreted unidentified
aerial phenomena as divinely-ordained craft designed to help them cannot be ignored.
The contemporary belief among many ufologists that America is secretly aided by
crashed saucer technology from Roswell represents a similar pattern in our own century.
We can only note these beliefs and move on.
324

Fig. 66: The vision of Zacharias
The correlation between many unexplained sightings and religious or historical events
brings up three important observations about potential biases in our data:
(1) Events that were received within a religious context were better preserved simply
because witnesses, priests and monks generally could read and write. They had a tradition
and techniques of preserving records. Furthermore, they thought the observation was
important. (Similarly, UFOs seen over nuclear plants or missile silos are more likely to be
watched and documented today.)
(2) If people attach spiritual significance to what they see, it affects their behavior and
is invested with more lasting reality than witnessing a passing light in the sky.
(3) The fact that witnesses perceived transcendent images in the phenomena may be
part of the mechanism of the phenomena.

Hence our argument that cases coinciding with religious dates or historical events are
not necessarily the imaginative or fanciful product of obsolete belief systems. Unusual
events are more likely to be recorded for posterity when they occur in important places, or
on important dates, or to important people. If some kind of UFO reality is accepted
(however simplistic) in such circumstances, a purely folkloric interpretation is not
necessarily the best theory.

Aerial phenomena in classical art
In ancient times, up till a couple of centuries ago, religious art was the most common form
of artistic expression. For centuries, painters created tapestries and pictures representing
the Virgin, Christ, the Nativity, and scenes from the Old Testament. During those
centuries comets and meteorites, triple suns and moons were also very commonly
chronicled and taken seriously.
An excellent example of this problem arises in connection with the Annunciation of
Carlo Crivelli displayed at the National Gallery of London because it seems to show a
hovering disk-like object sending a precisely collimated beam of golden light to Mary, as
she receives the message that she has been chosen to conceive the Son of God.
A modern critic named Cuoghi sees nothing unusual in this painting because "there is
a vast amount of Annunciations in which a ray descends from the sky reach-ing the
Madonna. Furthermore, as far as the Crivelli painting is concerned, (...) the object in the
sky is formed by a circle of clouds inside which there are two circles of small angels. It is
a very common way of representing the divinity, visible in so many works of sacred art.
The same particular in the Annunciation of Carlo Crivelli...."
325

Fig. 67: Annunciation, detail
One could point out that this argument actually brings water to the ufologist's mill: If
the origin of the message to Mary is represented as a bizarre hovering disk full of celestial
beings, doesn't that suggest that knowledgeable artists placed this event into the category
of specific interaction between humans and intelligent forces influencing us from the sky?
This case opens an interesting discussion about the representation of unusual
phenomena in art when the painting is not contemporary with the events depicted. In this
case the "disk" corresponds to nothing in the biblical narrative, any more than other
objects in the building such as the expensive drapes or the birds. We can only say that the
story of God's selection of Mary as the mother of Christ evoked a connection in the
artist's mind to a complex artifact hovering in the sky, which served as the source of a
golden beam. While this connection is interesting, it tells us nothing new about Mary's
actual experience.
Paintings do not offer valid evidence about the periods they represent. An image of
the Virgin Mary with a disk-shaped object flying in the background, if painted centuries
after the event, tells us nothing of the period in which Mary lived. However it does tell

how the event is being interpreted by the society surrounding the artist, which is valuable
in itself and should be noted.

Fig. 68: "Annunciation," by Carlo Crivelli

Fig. 69: Dialogue about Flight
This 1723 work by Pier Jacopo Martello, entitled Del Volo Dialogo: Mattina Prima
(Bologna: Lelio dalla Volpe) is the first scientific poem, along with Antonio Conti's
Globo di Venere, written in the eighteenth century.
We decided our best solution was to recount the history of ancient art in ufology,
point out its pros and cons, and give a few examples either way. Omens have been seen in
the sky for millennia, and interpreted as divine warnings, so it is not surprising to see them
reflected in ancient art. This does not mean that any example of it represents an actual

sighting. Sometimes the resemblance to phenomena reported today is stunning, but in the
case of UFOs, as in the case of virtually any human preoccupation, art reveals more about
the painter, his (or her) patron and the audience than about the subject itself.
The next engraving is a case in point. It represents an old man with a book
("Democritus ridet") at his feet. It has extraordinary importance for it foreshadows
modern aeronautics with amazing insight. The old man points to two ships floating in the
air. The first ship is merely a wooden boat but the second one, of more interest, represents
a bird-like structure upside down with feather-wings and a small awning above. From tail
to head stretches a sail; the tail acts as rudder. A figure stands inside watching another one
falling through the air. On the ground lies the ruin of another ship while behind stretches
an undulating landscape with bridge and tower and rows of poplars.

For further research...
It is vital to recognize the magnitude of the progress that the opening up of archives online
has made possible in this research. This fact also contributes to distorting the statistics
about the data: since pre-1800 texts cannot easily be read by optical character recognition
scanning software, the amount of information available to us after 1800 has become
mountainous in comparison to older records. Those researchers who believe that the UF©
phenomenon started manifesting on Earth around that time are simply misled by the fact
that our information sources are far more abundant and more readily available after the
eighteenth century.
Pre-1800 often means important but damaged records, unreadable or unpredictable
script, dirty or flaking paper, fewer surviving sources, and no keyword search possibilities.
It also means, in consequence, that such material is of little interest commercially, so what
is available online is much less than what exists in the real world. Oddly enough, Egyptian
records three or four millennia old, which were carved in the stone of stelae, preserve a
more complete story than some of our yellowing nineteenth century American

newspapers. We know what Akhenaton saw and heard in 1378 BC, but we have serious
uncertainties about the whereabouts of the Post Office building in Jay, Ohio after 1858.
Anyone complaining that we should go out and search archives and libraries page by
page has no idea how much time it takes, how hard on the eyes it is, and how hit-and-miss
it can be. Some brave early researchers like Dr. Bullard have spent decades looking for
old cases, compared to what the Internet-based Magoniax Project collected in just a few
years. The digitizing of text has given us this gift. We can breathe new life into aerial
phenomena research, just as the same sources can improve knowledge in other academic
fields.
As we complete the first edition of this book, we are painfully aware that many
sources remain beyond our grasp or even beyond our knowledge, because they are still
buried in faraway libraries, written in languages with which we are not familiar, or even
undeciphered in the dusty backrooms of museums. We are especially lacking in reliable
data from Japan, China, and India, all ancient civilizations where careful records were
kept down through the ages. We hope that scholars in those countries will be inspired to
teach us about the knowledge preserved in their libraries. Our fervent hope is that the
present book may stimulate scholars to dig out such material and bring it to the light of
modern review, to inform our search for meaning among phenomena that still puzzle our
best scientists today.

CONCLUSION

328

First, a word of disclosure: as authors of this compilation, we have worked with the
awareness that we could not escape projecting some of our own beliefs, and those of the
rt
Western society of the 21 century to which we belong, through the case selections we
have made.
The cement holding the reports together is based on two components: on the one
hand, some selection and research criteria we have tried to disclose with clarity; and on
the other, our faith that the majority of the sightings belong in the same group and are not
fictional. This already carries a perceptible message: we believe that most of the witnesses
we quote did in fact observe phenomena that have remained unexplained to this day.

Twelve important questions
At this point in our exploration of the mysteries of the past, the reader is entitled to ask:
what have we learned from all this work, how significant are the findings, do they teach us
anything new about the modern phenomena generally called "UFOs" and is there more yet
to be discovered? We will examine these topics systematically, and present our analysis as
a series of twelve specific questions.

1. How homogeneous is this Chronology of 500 cases?
The Chronology is only homogeneous by virtue of the selection criteria the authors have
applied after casting a very broad net over the literature, and throwing back the little fish,
the crustaceans, and the rotten algae back into the sea. We kept approximately one case in
five or ten, depending on the period and context. Our screening parameters, which
demanded a search for original references, a date and location, served to enhance the
quality of the data and promoted cases that came from reliable records over popular
rumors.
Having done this, we screened out the items where we could find no compelling
reason to think the phenomena described were other than meteors, aurorae borealis, ball
lightning, tornadoes or other unusual atmospheric effects. In spite of this effort, the
Chronology remains biased across time. We have more information on 19 century
incidents than medieval observations, as the following graph shows.
th

Fig. 70: Case distribution by period
The historical statistics break down as follows:
BC: 24 eases 13 century: 16 cases
0-250: 8 cases 14 century: 16 cases
250-500: 9 cases 15 century: 23 cases
500-750: 13 cases 16 century: 53 cases
750-1000: 23 cases 17 century: 97 cases
11th century: 15 cases 18 century: 62 cases
12 century: 16 cases 1800-1879: 127 cases
th
th

th
th
th

th

th

2. Isn't the Chronology biased by your own cultural backgrounds?

Undoubtedly it is. As disclosed above, we know much more about France or England than
about Japan or China. The two authors share a background in Western humanities and the
tradition of scientific enquiry that represents a selection bias against unfamiliar Asian,
African, Polynesian, or Native American sources, especially those embedded in the
imagery and texts of pre-1900 societies.
Most contemporary students of unidentified flying objects posit that the phenomenon
is of recent origin and centers on the Anglo-Saxon world simply because it became
popular in the American press after World War Two. While we have avoided this pitfall,
we cannot claim expertise in using sources in cultures other than our own. Thus, given
two fragmentary rumors about similar events in medieval France and in a remote part of
Asia, we are more likely to invest time and effort in tracking down the more accessible
French reference, because of its more familiar linguistic and historical context, than the
Asian one. We are also more likely to view the Asian story through a skeptical filter
because of possible mistakes in translation and an absence of cultural references. This bias
could only be corrected by researchers from other cultures joining in this effort.

Fig. 71: Case distribution by country
The geographical statistics break down as follows:

3. Do these cases represent a global phenomenon?
As one reads through the chronology from end to end, two things become clear: (a) no
convenient natural phenomenon or combination of natural phenomena accounts for the
collection of events we have selected, although some alternative explanations may be
proposed for individual cases and (b) the same unexplained features occur again and
again, often in the same words in the language of witnesses.
The overwhelming fact is that we are dealing with a narrow range of anomalous
objects in the atmosphere or in space, typically described as spheres, balls, or disks,
capable of extraordinary trajectories, generally of significant duration, often in formation,
described by multiple observers and viewed as important enough to be reported to
330

authorities (religious, administrative, or scientific). These features do characterize the
events in all countries and all periods.

4. Is this all there is?
Certainly not! Even in regions such as Western Europe, which produced most of our
current data, there must be much published (but unscanned) material we have not been
able to reach, and there must be large amounts of reports buried in manuscript form in
local archives, unpublished personal diaries and private correspondence.

5. Who are the witnesses?
They represent a cross-section of the population, with a preponderance of scientists or
enlightened amateurs of "natural philosophy" after 1750 or so. Not surprisingly, given the
nature of medieval society, most of the cases involved multiple witnesses, often an entire
village or two. Other cases involved the crews of ships, even groups of soldiers at war,
and in a couple of sightings, a king with his retinue. Single-witness cases did happen, of
course, and religious interpretations were common, but this does not detract from the
major facts of the observations.

6. Could all this be simply delusionary?
No, although delusions are a factor in the interpretation of the phenomena, as we have
abundantly documented in Part II of this book. Psychological or anthropological
explanations fail to account for most of the cases selected in the Chronology. In fact, the
so-called "rational" explanations proposed by academic experts are often as delusionary as
the most fanciful reports, and they fail to account for the observed facts in the same way.

Given the preponderance of multiple-witness cases, and the many events attested by
figures in authority such as astronomers, State or Church representatives, as well as the
extensive investigations some of the events have triggered, it is not reasonable to claim
that no physical phenomenon of an unusual nature was present.

331

Fig. 72: Frequency of cases as a function of duration
Furthermore, a review of the duration of the sightings (known to us in 106 cases)
shows that most of the objects or phenomena were in sight for a considerable time,
certainly long enough for the witnesses to have called other people, and to have
ascertained the circumstances of the observation.

The duration statistics (above chart) are as follows:

Such a distribution is not typical of delusionary events or hallucinations.

7. Are there general patterns behind the sightings?
We have only begun to study this body of data for possible patterns. In particular, the time
of day is known or at least estimated with some precision (plus or minus one hour) for no
less than 205 cases, or 40% of the total.
The resulting distribution is consistent with the results of similar studies conducted on
the basis of catalogues of contemporary UFO sightings (notably in the book The Edge of
Reality by Dr. J. Allen Hynek and Dr. Jacques Vallee, Chicago: Contemporary Books,
1975, page 20): the frequency of reported cases rises before dawn, with a first peak about
6 A.M., and goes through a maximum between 8 P.M. and 10 P.M., returning to a low
level during the night.
During most of the day, sighting frequency remains around the noise level. While this
can be interpreted as an indication of the visibility of the phenomenon (most clear in
contrast with its surroundings when the sun is not present) and a consequence of most

people going inside after dark, it does indicate that a real phenomenon was present.
Hallucinations or hoaxes would have no reason to follow the same pattern.

Fig. 73: Frequency as a function of time of day (in hours, from 1 A.M. to
midnight)
This is a striking result, because it only leaves us with two possible conclusions: either tM
same phenomenon known today under the label "UFO" has existed throughout history, or
there is a massive, unrecognized mechanism that generates such imagery and propagates it
through human society in all periods and in all cultures. Either conclusion represents new
knowledge and has important consequences.

8. How "physical" is the phenomenon?

The witnesses are primarily describing luminous phenomena that range from "fiery
globes" and "glowing forms" to vertical pillars and "towers" that occasionally emit flashes
and beams or expel other objects. However, many of the cases also mention disk-shaped
or globular objects that cast no light and are capable of rapid evolution in the atmosphere,
reversing course, dashing and darting, or falling in zigzag patterns. In some welldocumented cases the phenomenon gave off intense heat, destroyed vegetation or dropped
metallic residue.
In an era when there was no radio, no radar, no awareness of radioactivity and little
ability to analyze chemical substances, we know nothing about other potential effects, but
it is worthy to note that experienced astronomical observers have frequently reported
tracking dark objects across the disk of the sun or the moon.
All these indications converge to support the concept of an unrecognized, physical
phenomenon that is relatively rare and unpredictable, but consistent in its general
appearance and effects.

9. Is this relevant to the modern UFO phenomenon?
As we have already pointed out, there is little difference between the general behavior
characterizing the cases in the Chronology and modern sightings of unidentified flying
objects, down to sharp details such as witness paralysis, contact with forms of
consciousness described as alien, and even the feeling in witnesses that a new form of
communication has occurred between them and the phenomenon.
Before jumping to the simple conclusion that some extraterrestrial technology has
been at work in both ancient and modern reports, we must pause and consider the
contradictions this would raise: Why would this technology remain so constant? What
would be its purpose? It cannot be discovery, can it, if some "Alien" race has had access
to the Earth and to human civilization for centuries? And why would there be so many
observations? We know that we have only detected one sighting report in ten or a

hundred, others being lost to fires, revolutions, censorship or illiteracy, not to mention the
vast areas of the globe where there was little or no communication with the outside world
during the period we have studied.

10. Why has science ignored this body of data?
Scientific dogma dictates that any ancient observation of unexplained aerial phenomena
can always be attributed to the ignorance of the populace or to simple misinterpretation of
natural effects. Acting on this unproven assumption, scientists have censored their own
data and intimidated their peers to silence open debate about the phenomenon.
There is a case to be made, however, for a very cautious approach. We have shown
that hallucination was not a significant factor among the cases we have selected, but
extreme weather and meteorite crashes do happen, as well as aurorae, globular lightning,
comets and tornadoes, all fantastic phenomena that were poorly understood before modern
science documented them. In particular, we asked whether meteors could play a role in the
observed distribution.
The major meteor showers are the Quarantids (3-4 January), the Lyrids (21-22 April),
the Perseids (12-13 August), the Leonids (17-18 November) and the Geminids (13-14
December). We are in a position to test this hypothesis, since 309 of our cases have a
complete date (or over 60%).

Fig. 74: Frequency during the year, with 4 points per month
We find that only one peak of the frequency curve in our Chronology shows an increase
that could correlate with any cyclical meteoritic activity (the Perseids of August). The two
other peaks are around March 17th and especially October 10 , as seen on the above
graph, and those are not periods of meteoritic activity.
th

334

11. How can the impact on society be characterized?
Much of the attention devoted by a few courageous sociologists to unidentified
phenomena has focused on the modern literature of ufology. The overwhelming majority
of specialized books repeat the standard story of pilot Kenneth Arnold, who saw an
apparent formation of "flying saucers" in June 1947, dating the beginning of the
phenomenon from this event. Never mind that Mr. Arnold never said the objects were

shaped like saucers, and that his observation came after several years of sightings of
unexplained lights in the sky over Europe, Asia and America.
Such sociological research is correct, however, in characterizing the interaction
between the witnesses, the media and the few scientists who took the trouble to study the
reports. In recent years, this interaction has fueled the feeling among much of society that
governments and military authorities must be covering up the truth about what seems to be
a secret awareness of (and possibly secret contact with) external intelligences controlling
the phenomenon.
The study of ancient cases should caution us about such conclusions, attractive as
they are superficially. If the phenomenon is as old as the Pharaohs, the cover-up must be
very sophisticated indeed, and unlike any process of information control in history.
Censorship is certainly a factor, but isn't it more likely that it acts locally, like the
Inquisition's efforts to impose Christianity by denying the expression of alternative
beliefs?

12. What is the next step?
Better documentation is mandatory. Our limited efforts in this book have shown that much
new information, and new knowledge, could be obtained by a well-organized group using
modern communications technology. We did it with no money, in an environment of little
interest to scientific organizations, official folklore researchers, or most publishers. We
hope others will be inspired to use this model on a larger scale.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

335

This compilation, and the massive dredging of old text it implied, followed by critical
study of every source, would have been impossible without the collaboration of a unique
team of scholars who worked with us in this research.
The Magoniax Group, recruited and maintained by Chris Aubeck, has worked for
seven years through the Internet to assemble and validate an enormous amount of raw
sighting data. It has also exchanged information with interested researchers the world over
on every related topic, from the fairy faith in Celtic countries to the review of archives of
geophysical effects, cometography, modern astronomical records, as well as the tracking
down of ancient Egyptian parchments.
Among the contributors most active in this remarkable group are: Rod Brock, Jerome
Clark and Thomas Bullard from the United States, Mikhail Gershtein from Russia, Daniel
Guenther from Germany, Eduardo Russo and Giuseppe Stilo from Italy, Javier Garcia
Blanco and Jesus Callejo from Spain, Peter Hassall from New Zealand, and Fabio Picasso
from Argentina. We are grateful for their tireless contributions.
We have also benefited from the help offered to us by many librarians, researchers,
publishers and curators who were kind enough to respond to enquiries about data we were
seeking to validate. Mr. Franck Marie, a tireless French researcher who has assembled a
private collection of some 30,000 references on aerial phenomena and related events,
many of them within our period of interest, gave us access to this valuable resource.

In our initial efforts to create an index of cases reported in the general literature w e
consulted the work of many private UFO researchers and writers including Desmond
Leslie, Harold Wilkins, Guy Quincy, Aime Michel, Jean Sider, Godelieve van Overmeire,
Michel Bougard, Christiane Piens, Ion Hobana, Lucius Farish, Gordon Creighton,
Matthew Hurley, Jean-Francois Boedec, Claude Mauge, Ron Brinkley and numerous
other dedicated collectors who helped us through their writing and sometimes in person,
providing their own catalog data or research into specific ancient cases.
The contribution by Yannis Deliyannis, a classical scholar who tracked down and
translated for us many hard-to-find references, deserves a special mention. Yannis holds a
postgraduate degree in archaeology from the Sorbonne and has contributed to the
development of a manuscript computer database at the Bibliotheque Sainte-Genevieve. In

336

2001 he was involved in the creation of the Institut National d'Histoire de I 'Art in Paris.

Without such careful and critical reviewithout such careful and critical review of the
original data available on this complex subject, we would have drowned in a sea of
uncorrelated and often poorly documented rumors about a variety of phenomena, many of
which turned out to be explainable as natural atmospheric or physical effects.
Finally, this book owes much to the encouragements of Professor David Hufford and
to the advice of Dr. Jeff Kripal, chairman of the department of Religious Studies at Rice
University, who provided valuable contacts with other researchers. Michael Murphy, a t
the Esalen Institute, allowed us to test some of our ideas before knowledgeable and
stimulating audiences, and publisher Mitch Horowitz turned the concept of this book into
a reality.
Much remains to be done. We believe we express the consensus of this group of
researchers when we say that the study of ancient unexplained aerial observations has only
begun. We invite scholars and interested amateurs from all countries and cultures - and
especially from the Middle East, Latin America, and Asia, to join this continuing effort.
337

An important further note from Jacques Vallee
Although my name comes first on the cover of this book, the reader should know that
Chris Aubeck did the pioneering work in researching, critiquing and documenting material
that had been neglected or treated with considerable inaccuracy in the literature. When we
discovered we shared a passion for such ancient reports we began working together,
merging our sources and catalogues and enlisting our personal networks in support of the
research.
In the process Chris made me aware of many previously unknown instances of aerial
phenomena, but more importantly he taught me to look at them in new ways.
Wonders in the Sky is the product of many, sometimes heated debates and
compromises about the relevance of each case. In this creative interaction, which
continues today, I have learned to value the high standards of authenticity and accuracy
Chris has brought to the field, and I am proud to contribute in making them more widely
understood for a new generation of paranormal researchers.

LIST of ILLUSTRATIONS
Fig. 1 Abduction of Elijah (2 Kings 2:11). Engraving by Gustave Pore: The Bible (1865).
Fig. 2 Abduction of Ezekiel (Ezekiel 1:1-3). Engraving by Matthaeus Merian, Iconum
Biblicarum, Francfort 1627.
Fig. 3 Sighting in Hadria (interpretation by J. Vallee).
Fig. 4 Flying Apsara from the Mogao Caves, China.
Fig. 5 Clovis guided by a pillar of light (interpretation by J. Vallee).
Fig. 6 Annals of Ireland. Edited by John O'Donnovan. Dublin: Irish Archaeological and
Celtic Society, I860. (Front page).
Fig. 7 Miniature. Radziwill Chronicle, 15th century. [Library of the Russian Academy of
Sciences, Saint Petersburg]
Fig. 8 Crosses in the sky. Lycosthenes, Prodigiorum ac ostentorum Chronicon. Basel:
Henrici Petri (1557), p. 494.
Fig. 9 Arabian "rocket". Lycosthenes, op. cit., p. 494.
Fig. 10 Girolamo Cardano, portrait, 16th century: unknown artistFig. 11 Ignatius of Loyola saved by an angel: unknown artistFig. 12 Michelangelo, portrait, 19th century reproduction. [Univ. of Texas Libraries,
Austin].
Fig. 13 Boaistuau, Pierre. Histoires prodigieuses, Paris, 1560.
Fig. 14 Cellini, portrait.

Fig. 15 Ein Erschrecklich vnd VVunderbarlich zeychen..., Niirnberg: Joachim Heller,
1554. [GNM Niirnberg. HB 781/12041
Fig. 16 Objects seen at Nuremberg. Erscheinung am Himmel iiber Niirnberg am 14. April
1561. [Zurich Zentralbibliothek PAS II 12:601
Fig. 17 Objects seen at Basel. Coccius (Koch), Samuel. VVunderbare aber Warhaffte
Gesicht..., Basel: Samuel Apiarius. 1558. [Zurich Zentralbibliothek Ms. F. 18|.
Fig. 18 Agrippa d'Aubigne, portrait: unknown artist. [Bibliotheque Nationale de France].
Fig. 19 Discours au vray des terribles et espouvantables signes...Troyes: Odard Aulmont,
1608. IBM Troves, cl.12.99051.
Fig. 20 Beschreibung der am 3.4.5. vnd 6. Julii dises 1612. Jars erschienen vnd grausamen
erschrocklichen Wunderzeichen am Himmel. Basel: Johann Schroter (1612). [Herzog
August Bibliothek, HAB 38.25 Aug. 2°, fol. 799.1
Fig. 21 Anne Bodenham's magic. Bower, James, The Tryal..., London: Horton, 1653.
Fig. 22 Wonders in England: The five strange wonders, in the north and west of England,
etc. London: W.Thomas (1659). (Front page).
Fig. 23 Stralsund phenomenon. Francisci, Erasmus. Der wunderreiche Ueberzug unserer
Nider-Welt/Order Erd-umgebende. Niirnberg (1680), p. 624.
Fig. 24 Francisci, Erasmus, op. cit. (Front page).
Fig. 25 Mittelfischach phenomenon. Abriss des Erschrecklichen wunderzeichens, so sich
den 15. Novembr. 1667 beim dorff Mittelfischach..., [s.1.1 (1667). [Goethe
Universitatsbibliothek Frankfurt-am-Main, coll. Gustav Freytag, Einblattdr. G.Fr.lll.
Fig. 26 Regensburg phenomenon. Wunderzeichen, Zu Regensburg gesehen am 18.Augusti
1671, Frankfurt am Main, 1672. [Goethe Universitatsbibliothek Frankfurt-am-Main, coll.
Gustav Freytag, Einblattdr. G.Fr.121.
Fig. 27 Jane Lead's vision. Lead, Jane. A fountain of gardens watered by the rivers of
divine pleasure..., London: J. Bradford, 1696, p. 264.
339

Fig. 28 Mecklenburg phenomenon. Nachdencklich-dreyfaches Wunder-Zeichen...,
Frankfurt am Main, 1697. [Goethe Universitatsbibliothek Frankfurt-am-Main, coll. GusftW
Freytag, Einblattdr. G. Fr.131.
Fig. 29 Nightwatchmen in London. The Age of Wonders: or, a farther discriptton [sicl of
the fiery appartion [sic]..., London: J. Read, 1710. [British Library, 1104.a.24]. Copyright
Mary Evans Picture Library, London. Reprinted by permission.
Fig. 30 Bern prodigies. An Account of Terrible Apparitions..., Glasgow, 1721. (Front
P^e).
Fig. 31 London "waving rocket". Phil. Transactions, vol. 43, London, 1745, p.524.
Fig. 32 Ramsberg sockens kyrkobok, El: 1 (1786-1774). Handwritten entry by Rev.
Vigelius. [Landsarkivet Uppsala, Sweden].
Fig. 33 Charles Messier, portrait by Ansiaume, 1771. [Bib, de TObservatoire de Paris].
Fig. 34 1808 Moscow phenomenon. Moscow daily Komsomolskaya Pravda, 2 July 2006.
Fig. 35 Arago, portrait.
Fig. 36 Reverend Webb: unknown photographer.
Fig. 37 Le Verrier, portrait.
Fig. 38 The Dropa hoax. Das Vegetarische Universum (July, 1962), German magazine by
Reinhardt Wegemann.
Fig. 39 Flying Vimana at Ellora Caves, India. Ancient carving.
Fig. 40 Tulli papyrus (detail). Doubt, no. 41 (1953).
Fig. 41 Moses and the blue object (Plagues of Egypt, Exodus 5-9).From the Ashkenazi
Haggadah, 15th century. [British Library, Add.Ms.14762].
Fig. 42 Manna from Heaven (Exodus 16). Miniature from the Maciejowski Bible, 13th
century. [Pierpont Morgan Library, NY, Ms. M 638].
Fig. 43 Silver shields (interpretation by J. Vallee).
Fig. 44 Qu Yuan: From Wikipedia.
Fig. 45 Star of BethlehemFig. 46 Emperor Constantine, 19th century: unknown artist.
341

Fig. 47 Cross-shaped illusions. Flammarion, Camille. L'Atmosphere et les Grands
Phenomenes de la Nature, Paris: Hachette, 1905.
Fig. 48 Apparition to Mohammed. Miniature from the Jami'al-Tawarikh by Rashid al-Din.
Tabriz, Persia, 1307. [Edinburgh University Library].
Fig. 49 Bulletin des Antiquaires de France, Paris: Klincksieck, 1911. (Front page).
Fig. 50 Miniature. Hildegard von Bingen, Liber Scivias, 12th century.
Fig. 51 Celestial phenomena. Schedel, Hartman. Liber Chronicarum, Niirnberg, 1493,
BSB-Ink S-195. Reproduced by permission of Bayerische Staatsbibliothek Miinchen,
Rar.287.
Fig. 52 Freiburg meteor. Mennel, Jakob. De signis, portentis, prodigiis..., 1503.
[Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, Vienna, cod. 4417].
Fig. 53 French jeton, ca. 1656 [private collection].
Fig. 54 Tuscany phenomenon. Reproduced in Alata Quaderni, no. 1 (Feb 1979).
Fig. 55 Casanova, portrait.
Fig. 56 Goethe, portrait.
Fig. 57 The meteor of August 18, 1783, as seen from Windsor Castle, painting by Paul
and Thomas Sandby; 1783. [British Museum].
Fig. 58 Japanese object and occupant. From the Japanese Toen-Shosetsu (1825).
Fig. 59 Commodore Decatur, early 20th century reproduction: unknown artist. [Library of
Congress].
Fig. 60 Batman, Stephen. The Doome, warning all men..., London, 1581. (Detail).
Fig. 61 Boetius: unknown artist.
Fig. 62 Matthew Paris. Self portrait from the original manuscript of his Historia
Anglorum, 13th century. [British Library, MS Royal 14.C.VII, folio 6r].
Fig. 63 Gregoire de Tours and Salvius facing King Chilperic. Miniature from the Grandes
Chroniques de France de Charles V, 14th century. [Bibliotheque Nationale de France, MS
FR 28131.

Fig. 64 Three suns in 1492. Flammarion, Camille. L'Atmosphere, Paris: Hachette, 1872
[18711, p. 233.
Fig. 65 Full and True Relation: A Full and True Relation of the Strange and Wonderful
Apparitions..., London, 1715. [British Libraryl.
Fig. 66 Vision of Zacharias (Zacharias 6, 1-15). Engraving by Gustave Pore: The Bible
(1865).
Fig. 67 Annunciation (detail). See below.
Fig. 68 "Annunciation," by Carlo Crivelli, 15th century. [National Gallery of London].
Fig. 69 Pialogue about Flight. From the Pel Volo Pialogo of Pier Jacopo Martello, 1723.
Opere di Pier Jacopo Martello, Bologna, 1723-1735, vol. 5, p. 371 (in text plate).
Fig. 70 Case Pistribution by period (J. Vallee)
Fig. 71 Case Pistribution by country (J. Vallee)
Fig.72 Case Pistribution by duration (J. Vallee)
Fig.73 Case Pistribution by time of day (J. Vallee)
Fig. 74 Case Pistribution by week during the year (J. Vallee)
Note: The authors have made every effort to contact individuals and organizations with
regards to copyright permissions prior to publication. However, many items came to us
through the general literature and the Internet with limited documentation about
ownership. If you feel that we have infringed on any rights or have erroneously quoted
specific references, we will be grateful for information that might be useful in correcting
such mistakes.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

343

In addition to the sources and references cited throughout this book, we have found
the following works important to verify the reliability of many cases in the literature.
Burns, William E. An Age of Wonders: Prodigies, Politics and Providence in England
1657-1727. New York: Manchester University Press, 2002.

Christian, William A. Apparitions in Late Medieval and Renaissance Spain. Princeton
University Press, 1989.

Corliss, William R. Remarkable Luminous Phenomena in Nature: A Catalog of
Geophysical Anomalies. The Sourcebook Project. Glen Arm, MD, 2001.

Kronk, Gary W. Cometography: Volume 1, Ancient-1799. A Catalog of Comets.
Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Olivyer, I. L., and J. F. Boedec. Les Soleils de Simon Goulart: Vague OVNI de 1500 a
1600. Marseille: Ada, 1981.

Rasmussen, Susanne William. Public Portents in Republican Rome. Rome: L'Erma di
Bretschneider, 2003.

344

Wildfang, Robin Lorsch and Isager, Jacob. Divination and Portents in the Roman World.
University Press of Southern Denmark, 2000.

Among essential online sources are:
Newspaper Archive: www.newspaperarchive.com
Internet Medieval Sourcebook:
www.fordham.edu/halsall/sbook.html
Internet Archive: www.archive.org

For further contact
Chris Aubeck invites comments through the Internet at:
caubeck@gmail.com
Jacques Vallee can be contacted at:
PO Box 641650
San Francisco, California 94164
USA

345

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

346

Jacques Vallee holds a master's degree in astrophysics from France and a Ph.D. in
computer science from Northwestern University, where he served as an associate of Dr. J.
Allen Hynek. He is the author of several books about high technology and unidentified
phenomena, a subject that first attracted his attention as an astronomer in Paris. While
analyzing observations from many parts of the world, he became intrigued by the
similarities in patterns between moderrn sightings and historical reports of encounters
with flying objects and their occupants in every culture. The result was the seminal book

Passport to Magonia, published in 1969.

After a career as an information scientist with Stanford Research Institute and the Institute
for the Future, where he served as a principal investigator for the groupware project on the
Arpanet, the prototype of the Internet, Jacques Vallee cofounded a venture capital firm in
Silicon Valley, where he works.
Chris Aubeck was born in London. His interest in the historical and sociological aspects
of unexplained aerial phenomena began at an early age. He moved to Spain at age 19 and
now lives in Madrid, where he works as an interpreter and English teacher at the Madrid
Development Institute. A student of folklore and philology, he has helped compile the
largest collection of pre-1947 UFO cases in the world. He has spoken on his research in

347

many articles and on public radio. In 2008 he was awarded a prize for his contributions to
the field by the Spanish organization Fundacion Anomalia.
In 2003, Aubeck cofounded a remarkable collaborative network of librarians, students,
and scholars of paranormal history on the Internet. This group, known as the Magoniax
Project, extends from North and Central America to Russia and Germany. It has
accumulated thousands of references, searched media archives in several languages, and
gathered hundreds of rare documents, scientific reports, and newspaper clippings from the
last four hundred years.

